DOORS OF THE TEMPLE.


    Many are the doors of the spirit that lead
      Into the inmost shrine:
    And I count the gates of the temple divine,
      Since the god of the place is God indeed.
      And these are the gates that God decreed
    Should lead to his house:--kisses and wine,
    Cool depths of thought, youth without rest,
      And calm old age, prayer and desire,
    The lover's and mother's breast,
      The fire of sense and the poet's fire.

    But he that worships the gates alone,
      Forgetting the shrine beyond, shall see
      The great valves open suddenly,
    Revealing, not God's radiant throne,
      But the fires of wrath and agony.




    VILLIERS DE L'ISLE-ADAM.


    Up from the darkness on the laughing stage
    A sudden trap-door shot you unawares,
    Incarnate Tragedy, with your strange airs
    Of courteous sadness. Nothing could assuage
    The secular grief that was your heritage,
    Passed down the long line to the last that bears
    The name, a gift of yearnings and despairs
    Too greatly noble for this iron age.

    Time moved for you not in quotidian beats,
    But in the long slow rhythm the ages keep
    In their immortal symphony. You taught
    That not in the harsh turmoil of the streets
    Does life consist; you bade the soul drink deep
    Of infinite things, saying: "The rest is naught."




    DARKNESS.


    My close-walled soul has never known
    That innermost darkness, dazzling sight,
    Like the blind point, whence the visions spring
    In the core of the gazer's chrysolite ...
    The mystic darkness that laps God's throne
    In a splendour beyond imagining,
      So passing bright.

    But the many twisted darknesses
    That range the city to and fro,
    In aimless subtlety pass and part
    And ebb and glutinously flow;
    Darkness of lust and avarice,
    Of the crippled body and the crooked heart ...
      These darknesses I know.




    MOLE.


    Tunnelled in solid blackness creeps
    The old mole-soul, and wakes or sleeps,
    He knows not which, but tunnels on
    Through ages of oblivion;
    Until at last the long constraint
    Of each-hand wall is lost, and faint
    Comes daylight creeping from afar,
    And mole-work grows crepuscular.
    Tunnel meets air and bursts; mole sees
    Men hugely walking ... or are they trees?
    And far horizons smoking blue,
    And chasing clouds for ever new?
    Green hills, like lighted lamps aglow
    Or quenching 'neath the cloud-shadow;
    Quenching and blazing turn by turn,
    Spring's great green signals fitfully burn.
    Mole travels on, but finds the steering
    A harder task of pioneering
    Than when he thridded through the strait
    Blind catacombs that ancient fate
    Had carved for him. Stupid and dumb
    And blind and touchless he had come
    A way without a turn; but here,
    Under the sky, the passenger
    Chooses his own best way; and mole
    Distracted wanders, yet his hole
    Regrets not much wherein he crept,
    But runs, a joyous nympholept,
    This way and that, by all made mad--
    River nymph and oread,
    Ocean's daughters and Lorelei,
    Combing the silken mystery,
    The glaucous gold of her rivery tresses--
    Each haunts the traveller, each possesses
    The drunken wavering soul awhile;
    Then with a phantom's cock-crow smile
    Mocks craving with sheer vanishment.

    Mole-eyes grow hawk's: knowledge is lent
    In grudging driblets that pay high
    Unconscionable usury
    To unrelenting life. Mole learns
    To travel more secure; the turns
    Of his long way less puzzling seem,
    And all those magic forms that gleam
    In airy invitation cheat
    Less often than they did of old.

    The earth slopes upward, fold by fold
    Of quiet hills that meet the gold
    Serenity of western skies.
    Over the world's edge with clear eyes
    Our mole transcendent sees his way
    Tunnelled in light: he must obey
    Necessity again and thrid
    Close catacombs as erst he did,
    Fate's tunnellings, himself must bore
    Through the sunset's inmost core.
    The guiding walls to each-hand shine
    Luminous and crystalline;
    And mole shall tunnel on and on,
    Till night let fall oblivion.




    THE TWO SEASONS.


    Summer, on himself intent,
      Passed without, for nothing caring
        Save his own high festival.
      My windows, blind and winkless staring,
    Wondered what the pageant meant,
        Nor ever understood at all.
    And oh, the pains of sentiment!
      The loneliness beyond all bearing ...
        Mucus and spleen and gall!

    But now that grey November peers
      In at my fire-bright window pane?
        And all its misty spires and trees
      Loom in upon me through the rain
    And question of the light that cheers
        The room within--now my soul sees
    Life, where of old were sepulchres;
        And in these new-found sympathies
    Sinks petty hopes and loves and fears,
      And knows that life is not in vain.




    TWO REALITIES.


    A waggon passed with scarlet wheels
      And a yellow body, shining new.
    "Splendid!" said I. "How fine it feels
    To be alive, when beauty peels
      The grimy husk from life." And you

    Said, "Splendid!" and I thought you'd seen
      That waggon blazing down the street;
    But I looked and saw that your gaze had been
    On a child that was kicking an obscene
      Brown ordure with his feet.

    Our souls are elephants, thought I,
      Remote behind a prisoning grill,
    With trunks thrust out to peer and pry
    And pounce upon reality;
      And each at his own sweet will

    Seizes the bun that he likes best
    And passes over all the rest.