CHAPTER I

AN EARLY MORNING GALLOP.


“Hey dar, come along. What’s detainin’ yo’ all?”

Two boys, one, a gaunt, long-legged, barefooted colored lad, mounted on
a lean mule, and the other a white lad, knees in and bestriding a fat,
puffing, sway-backed mare, came dashing down a country road in Virginia.

“You black rascal!” panted the white rider, “what d’you mean? Pull up!”

“I cain’t,” shouted the boy on the mule. “Ole Jim’s got de bit.”

“Bit?” muttered the other rider, noticing the mule’s rope halter and
smiling. “I reckon Amos wants a race.”

Loosening his worn and dingy reins the white boy drew himself
together, took a fresh grip on an old fashioned riding crop and spoke
to his mount.

“You ain’t goin’ to take the dust from a common mule, are you, Betty?”

As if she understood, the laboring mare, already wet with foam, and
with nostrils throbbing, sprang forward.

“Out of the way!” shouted her rider. His light hair lay flat on his
bare head and his arms were close by his side. “Mules off the road for
the old hunter!”

Like a flash the boy on the mare passed the plunging, clattering old
Jim and his humped-up rider. But only for a moment. Proud Betty, once
the pride of the late Colonel Aspley Marshall, the hunter that took the
dust from nothing in western Virginia, had seen her day. Old Jim came
on like an avalanche.

“Cain’t stop dis beas’, Marse Morey. Git outen de way, Marse Morey,
we’s needin’ de road.”

Hanging about the neck of the mule, Amos, the colored boy, opened his
mouth, flashing a row of white teeth on Morey’s sight. The young rider
knew that Amos was laughing at him. He set his square jaw and leaned
forward over the old hunter’s neck.

“Betty,” he whispered, patting the soft, silken coat of his laboring
animal, “for the honor of the stable we used to own--_go it_!”

And Betty tried--her nostrils now set, her head and neck forward, and
the light young rider firm but easy in his seat.

“Can’t hold him, eh?” shouted Betty’s rider as the mule drew alongside.

Amos was digging his bare heels into old Jim’s ribbed sides and lashing
like mad with the end of his bridle rope.

Morey saw that he was beaten in a flat race, but he did not surrender.

“Race you to the barn,” he cried as Amos’ kicks and lashing forced the
plow mule once more to the front, “and over the front gate.”

“No sah! No sah!” trailed back from Amos. “Dis ain’t no fox hunt. Dis
am a plain hoss race. Not ober de gate.”

“The first one over the gate,” insisted the white boy, now falling well
behind.

Amos turned but he did not show his teeth.

“Look hyar, Marse Morey! What you talkin’ ’bout? Dat ole Betty ain’t
jumped no gate sence you all’s pa died. Yo’ll break yo’ fool neck.”

Morey only smiled. The two animals beat the hard highway with their
flying feet.

“Yo’ all’s on’y jokin’, Marse Morey,” pleaded the alarmed colored boy,
as the racing steeds came to the dirt road leading through what was
left of the Marshall estate, and headed toward the ramshackle old gate
a quarter of a mile away. The dust rolled behind the galloping horse
and mule. Amos turned and shouted again:

“Pull up dat ole plug. She cain’t jump a feed box. Yo’ all gwine break
bofe yo’ necks.”

The only answer was a wave of Morey’s riding crop and a toss of the
smiling boy’s head.

“Out of our way, boy!” sang out Morey. “Over the gate--”

“Hey, Marse Morey! Hey dar! Take yo’ ole race. I’s jes’ jokin’. I
ain’t racin’ no mo’,” and throwing himself backwards on old Jim the
frightened Amos pulled out of the race. But Betty, the stiff and
crippled old hunter, had her mettle up, and Morey made no effort to
stop her. With a laugh and a wave of his hand at the alarmed colored
boy as he dashed by, the cool young white lad gave the proud mare her
head.

At the half-broken gate the trembling animal, throwing off for a
moment the stiffness of years, came to a mincing pause, gathered her
fore feet beneath her and rose. Up in the air went Morey’s hands and
his father’s old crop as Betty’s fore feet cleared the top panel.
Then--crash! On the uncut grass of the door yard tumbled horse and
rider.

“I tol’ yo’! I tol’ yo’!” shouted Amos as Betty struggled clumsily to
her feet. “Marse Morey,” he added, rolling from old Jim’s back, “is yo’
hurted?”

There was a dash of red on the white cheek of the prostrate Morey but
in another moment he was on his feet.

“I ain’t hurt, you rascal, but the next time you turn that old plow
plug loose against Betty I’ll break your black head.”

“Yas sah, yas sah,” snickered Amos. “She sho’ was gwine some!”

“Rub Betty down and then give her a quart of oats.”

“Yo’ mean turn her in de fiel’!”

“Has she been fed this morning?”

“Dey ain’t no oats. We’s out ob oats.”

“Tell your father to order some.”

“I reckon he done ordah cawn an’ oats but dey’s slow bringin’ ’em.
Dey’s slow all de time. I done been borrowin’ oats offen Majah Carey.”

“Well,” exclaimed Morey proudly, “don’t you borrow any more oats from
Major Carey!”

“Why,” exclaimed Amos, “we been gittin’ fodder offen’ Majah Carey all
winter--all de while yo’ been to school. Dey’s so slow bringin’ oats
from town dey don’t never git hyar.”

“Did my mother tell you to go to the Carey’s for horse feed?”

“Fo’ de lan’ sake, chile! you don’ reckon my ole pap gwine to bodder
Miss Marshall ’bout oats and cawn! He jes’ tells me to go git ’em and I
done go git ’em.”

A peculiar look came into the face of Amos’ young master. But Morey
said nothing. Waving his hand to the solemn-faced colored boy to care
for the animals, he started across the long, fragrant June grass thick
about the dingy plantation home.

But trouble sat lightly on Morey Marshall. Before he and the shambling
Amos were many feet apart the young Virginian paused and gave an old
familiar soft whistle. The slow-footed colored boy stopped instantly,
and then, as Betty wandered at will into a new flower bed and the lean
mule walked with ears drooped towards the distant horse sheds, Amos
hurried to Morey’s side.

“Amos,” said Morey, “are you busy this morning?”

The colored boy looked at his white companion in open amazement.

“I said,” repeated Morey, “are you _busy_ this morning?”

Amos was not exactly quick-witted, but, in time, with great mental
effort, he figured out that this must be a joke.

A sparkle slowly came into his wide-set eyes and then his long, hollow
face grew shorter as his cheeks rounded out. His lips parted in a
curved slit and his white teeth shone. He laughed loudly.

“I reckon I’s gwine be purty busy. Ma’m Ca’line done tole me to sarch
de hen’s nes’. On’y,” and he scratched his kinky head, “on’y I ain’t
had no time yit to git de aiggs.”

“Well, I’ll help you with that. How many hens are there now?”

“Fo’. But one’s a rooster.”

“How many eggs do we get a day?”

“Ebery day two--sometimes. Des’ fo’ yo’ ma’s breakfus’.”

It was Morey’s turn to laugh.

“Pa’s done made ’rangements to lend us six pullets from Majah Carey.”

“To borrow six hens?”

“Sho’. We done borrow’ chickens mos’ ob de time--fo’ de aiggs. But we
don’t keep ’em. We always takes ’em back--mostly.”

“Mostly?” roared Morey.

“Shorely,” explained Amos soberly. “We’s pa’ticlar ’bout dat. But
we done et one of Captain Barber’s ole hens. She was too fat an’
lazy--didn’t git us one aigg.”

“Was this all for my mother?” queried Morey, his face clouding again.

“Yo’ ma don’ know nothin’ ’bout de critters. Pa, he paid Captain Barber
fo’ de ole hen we et.”

“That’s right.”

“Yas sah, yas sah. I done took him a dozen aiggs ma sef. Wha’ fo’ yo’
laffin’, boy? Da’s right.”

“What I wanted to know is, have you time to go fishing this morning?
How about that trout hole up at the bend of the creek?”

Amos’ smile gleamed again like a white gash.

“Ole Julius Cæsar, de king trout? Ain’t nobody cotch him yit. But he’s
got ’bout a million chilluns. Say, boy,” whispered the colored lad,
“I done reckon Miss Marshall had her breakfus’ by dis’ time. An’ dem
aiggs ain’t gwine to spile whar dey is. I’s git yo’ ol’ rod and yo’
ol’ flies, an’ say, I’s got one dat ah made mase’f. Dat fly’s fo’ ol’
Julius Cæsar an’ you. Say,” he concluded, looking wisely into the clear
blue unclouded sky and wrinkling his sober brow, “I spec’s we bes’ be
gwine ’long. Pears to me like rain.”

“I’ll meet you in a half hour by the tobacco shed,” exclaimed Morey.

Again Amos’ brow lowered and he shook his head.

“Ain’t yo’ ma tol’ you?” he asked.

“Told me what?”

“Dey ain’t no shed no mo’.”

“No shed!” exclaimed Morey, looking quickly toward the far end of the
old plantation. “Why, what’s become of it?”

“Captain Barber, he done tote it away.”

“Captain Barber moved it away? Why, what right has he on my mother’s
place?”

“I dunno. But he tooked it away.”

“When?” exclaimed Morey excitedly.

“When?” repeated Amos. “Da’s when he fit pa and call him ‘ol’ fashion
nigger better wake up.’”

Morey caught the colored boy by the shoulders.

“I didn’t know your father ever had a fight with our neighbor.”

“Not ezackly no fight, kase Captain Barber he wouldn’t do nothin’ but
laugh.”

“But what was it all about?”

“Pap done call him a liar.”

“Your pap ought to be hided. Captain Barber is a white man.”

“Yas sah, yas sah. But he _is_ a liar.”

Morey smiled again.

“Do you know what he lied about?” he asked.

Amos drew himself up in indignation.

“Didn’ he go fo’ to say he bought de’ ole fiel’ whar de baccy shed was?
An’ ain’t dat a big lie? Yo’ ma owns all dis ole plantation ’case pap
says she do. But he tooked de house. He ain’t buy dat lan’, is he?”
concluded the simple colored boy.

Morey stood in deep thought. But at last, his voice quavering, he said:

“I don’t know, Amos--I hope not.”

Morey had returned home that morning after a winter in school at
Richmond and a visit to his uncle in New York State. To him the old
house appeared much the same, and his mother was in no wise changed.
With her he had as yet had no talk over the affairs of the plantation
and, after his morning coffee, he had hurried with Amos to the
village two miles away on an errand. The hints that Amos had dropped
unconsciously startled him, but the sky was blue, the air was soft,
there was the smell of mint in the neglected grass and he was but
eighteen years old.

“Meet me where the barn used to be,” he exclaimed suddenly and, turning
ran toward the house.




CHAPTER II

BREAKFAST ON THE GALLERY.


Aspley Place, once the center of a large estate and the scene of much
hospitality in Colonel Aspley Marshall’s lifetime, was now surrounded
by a farm of less than two hundred acres. Mortimer, or “Morey” as he
was always called, and his mother, had been left dependent upon the
estate at Colonel Marshall’s death three years before. At first it was
not known that Colonel Marshall was financially involved. But his debts
almost consumed his supposed enormous and valuable tobacco plantation.
Out of the settlement Major Carey, his executor, saved for the widow
and her son the home. But it and the little farm immediately about
the house was mortgaged to Major Carey himself, who from year to year
renewed the notes for borrowed money.

On these few worn and almost exhausted acres a faithful retainer, an
old negro, Marshall or “Marsh” Green, who had been Colonel Marshall’s
servant from babyhood, made desperate efforts to provide a living for
his mistress. He and his boy Amos Green lived in the sole remaining
cabin of the old quarters, where, in the time of Colonel Marshall’s
father and in the days when Amos Green’s grandfather was a boy, there
had been a street of log huts beneath big oaks, and a hundred slaves
might be counted. Marsh Green and his boy now lived in a cabin patched
with store boxes, beneath a roof mended with flattened lard tins.

It was now many a day since the Marshalls had killed their own hogs,
and as for the old oaks, Colonel Aspley himself had sold them. In
truth, Morey’s father was neither a successful farmer nor a frugal
business man. He believed in the past, was a kind parent and husband,
had his mint juleps regularly, lived up to his patrimony and left for
Morey nothing more than the recollection of a chivalrous and proud
father, a mortgaged plantation, old Marsh Green and fat Betty, his
hunter.

But these things Morey neither knew nor understood. Mrs. Marshall had
a vague belief that what she called her “private fortune” would amply
care for her and for Morey’s education. She neither knew the amount of
this nor her real income. In fact, this fortune, left to her by an
uncle, was a meagre five thousand dollars, and the $250 it produced
annually, which Captain Barber’s bank at Lee’s Court House collected
and held for her, was always overdrawn.

It was by Captain Barber and Major Carey that Mrs. Marshall’s taxes
were looked after, her insurance cared for and her notes renewed
from year to year, and she lived on in dignity and pride with little
understanding of how the money came. Nor did she even suspect how much
was due to the ceaseless efforts of Marsh Green.

“Colonel Aspley’s overseer,” she always said in referring to the
faithful Green.

“Mrs. Marshall’s hired man,” said the newcomers who were turning old
and historic tobacco fields into fruit orchards and vegetable gardens.

But Marsh could hardly be called a “hired” man. If he was “hired” it
was without pay. All the money that the white-haired negro saw came
from the vegetables he grew that “the place” did not need. And these
were as much the property of old Marsh as if the plantation were his.
Mrs. Marshall did not even think of the matter. Twice a year she and
Marsh and Amos drove to Lee’s and the colored servitors were clothed.

The fall before, Morey, with much ceremony, had been forwarded to a
school for boys in Richmond, famous both for its excellent curriculum
and its high tuition. The bills for this had been met by Captain Barber
as long as the little account in his bank warranted. Then came the
inevitable.

On a day late in the winter Captain Barber and Major Carey, freshly
shaven and carrying their gold-headed canes, drove slowly up to Aspley
Place. Mammy Ca’line received them. In the musty old parlor, where
Colonel Marshall’s picture in his red hunting coat glared down upon his
old time friends, the nervous committee twirled two shiny canes.

Mrs. Marshall was not an old woman. Her veneration for the past was
not based on any love for long gold chains, earrings, or corkscrew ear
curls. There was something a little faded about her appearance but it
was not in her hair, nor in her face. Perhaps it was in the gown she
wore, but this neither the Captain nor the Major saw. Mrs. Marshall’s
neighborly greeting, her courtesy, preserved with many other graces
from the days of the old régime, her smile of peace and content,
disconcerted the visitors.

“Madam,” began Major Carey at last, “theah is a little mattah--a
trifle--but, ah, a mattah that we feel bound, Madam, to lay befoah you.”

“Ouah respect, Madam, foah yo’ husban’, the late Colonel Marshall, who
was ouah friend,”--added Captain Barber.

“The regard we hold fo’ his memory and fo’ you and yo’ son
Mortimer,”--went on the Major.

What they had come to say to Mrs. Marshall was that, in her
circumstances, Mortimer could not be sent away to a fashionable school;
that he could not hope to play the role of a gentleman, that the farm
was non-productive and should be sold, that Mortimer, now a young man,
should set about earning a living, and that she and her son ought to
purchase a cottage in the nearby village where they might live on a
reduced scale and dispense with the unremunerated services of old Marsh
and his idle, lazy, hungry son.

But no such suggestions were made.

Mrs. Marshall listened to the explanation of her financial straits
undisturbed. Where the agitated visitors expected tears and despair
they found a paralyzing calmness.

“I regret to say, my dear Madam,” concluded Major Carey at last and
with a dry throat, “that you now owe Mortimer’s school four hundred
dollars, and the bill is so long overdue that they are, ah, becoming
even impertinent.”

“I really thought it had been paid,” said Mrs. Marshall in her low,
soft tone and looking at her banker, Captain Barber, in an injured way.
The Captain only wiggled in his chair. He even dismissed the idea he
had had of telling Mrs. Marshall that she had already overdrawn her
account one hundred and eighty dollars. “Haven’t I some funds out at
interest?” continued their hostess.

“I think you have about--”

Mrs. Marshall smiled and raised her still plump hand.

“Please don’t bother about the details,” she added hastily. “You have
always been so good as to look after my business. I will take it as
a favor if you will realize out of my funds whatever is needed to
cover this obligation. I prefer to sacrifice my private fortune rather
than encumber the family estate which, of course,” and she smiled
comfortably, “is to be preserved for Mortimer.”

The two visitors could not look at each other. They sat silent and
aghast. The “family estate” had been reduced to less than two hundred
acres of worn out and almost unsalable tobacco land. Even this was
mortgaged and Major Carey had been carrying the obligation for years.
He had not even received a cent of interest since Colonel Marshall’s
death.

“Certainly, Madam,” stammered Captain Barber at last, rising. “Just as
you wish.”

“Mrs. Marshall,” said Major Carey bowing, “when Master Mortimer returns
from school will you have him do me the honor to call upon me?”

“With great pleasure,” said Mortimer’s mother, “although the poor boy
is not coming directly home at the close of school. He will first visit
his uncle Douglas in Hammondsport, New York. And, by the way, Captain,”
she added, turning to the flustered planter-banker, “I’m afraid his
wardrobe may require replenishing and he will need a little pocket
money. Will you kindly send him a hundred dollars and charge it to my
account?”

There was no help for it. If she had been a man the thrifty banker
would have been adamant. To the widow of his dead friend he only bowed.

“At once,” he answered politely. Then he added: “Madam, I trust you
will not think me impertinent. But what are your plans for your son’s
future?”

“Colonel Marshall was a tobacco grower,” she answered proudly. “The
Aspley plantation has known nothing but tobacco for a hundred and fifty
years.”

When Major Carey’s old buggy--he did not own or use an automobile--had
creaked down the weed-grown Aspley Place private road to the highway
and the unhinged gate had been dragged into place, Captain Barber
turned to his companion.

“If Mrs. Marshall’s son hasn’t any more business sense than his mother
the Barber Bank is going to have a tidy sum to charge up to profit and
loss. We’re two old fools. What do you want to see the boy about?”

Major Carey grunted. “I’m goin’ to tell him what his mother doesn’t
know--that she isn’t worth a cent and that he must go to work and care
for her.”

This was in March.

On the day in June that Morey reached his home, raced with Amos,
arranged to go in quest of “old Julius Cæsar” and his many “chilluns,”
and then made his way free-hearted and devoid of care over the unkempt
lawn toward the house, there was no thought in his mind of money, debts
and little of the future.

“Aspley House” hardly merited such a formal title. The building itself
was of wood, two stories high and long since denuded of paint. But the
gallery, or porch, in front seemed part of some other architectural
creation. The floor of it was flush with the yard and of brick, worn
and with sections missing here and there. The columns, unencumbered
with a second story floor, were of great round pillars of brick. They
had once been covered with cement, but this coating had now fallen away
and the soft red of the weather beaten bricks was almost covered with
entwined swaying masses of honeysuckle.

Beneath these blossoming vines Morey’s mother awaited him.

“I saw it,” she exclaimed anxiously. “I’ve seen your poor father do the
same. You are not hurt?”

“Hurt?” shouted Morey as his mother put her arm about his neck and
wiped the blood from his face with her lace handkerchief. “I’ve
forgotten it. Breakfast ready?”

In a fragrant, shaded corner of the gallery, where the brick pavement
was reasonably intact, sat a little table. On the snow-white cloth
rested a bowl of flowers. At two places thin, worn silver knives,
forks and spoons glistened with a new polish. But the “M” had nearly
disappeared from them.

“Say, mater,” laughed Morey, proud of his newly acquired Latin, “why
don’t you fix this pavement? Some one’s going to break his neck on
these broken bricks.”

“It should have been seen to before this,” his mother answered. “And I
really believe we ought to paint the house.”

“Looks like a barn,” commented Morey, attacking a plate of Mammy
Ca’line’s corn bread. “This some of our own butter?”

Mrs. Marshall looked up at the fat smiling Mammy Ca’line, beaming in
her red bandanna.

“Mammy,” asked Mrs. Marshall, “is this some of our own butter?”

“Ouah own buttah!” exclaimed the grinning cook, maid and all-around
servant. “Fo’ the lans’ sake, Miss Marshall, we ain’t made no buttah on
dis place sense ole Marse done gone, fo’ yars come dis fall.”

Mrs. Marshall sighed.

“Why don’t you?” snapped Morey with a tone that reminded his mother of
his dead father.

“Why don’t we?” laughed old Ca’line. “I reckon you boun’ to have cows
to make buttah--leastways _a_ cow. Dat ole Ma’sh Green don’ keep no
cows no mo’.”

Morey laughed.

“Runnin’ on the cheaps, eh?”

But his mother only smiled and sipped her coffee.

As the hungry, happy boy helped himself to one of the three thin slices
of bacon, old Ca’line leaned toward her mistress and said, in a low
voice:

“Miss Ma’shall, dat’s de lastest of dat two poun’ of salt meat.”

Mrs. Marshall smiled again.

“Have the overseer go to town this morning, Ca’line, and lay in what
supplies are needed. Have we any fowls on the place?”

“Yas ’um, dey’s fowls, but dey’s only ‘aiggers.’ Dey ain’t ‘eaters.’”

As Mrs. Marshall looked up in surprise, Morey experienced the first
serious moment of his life.

“It’s one of Amos’ jokes, mater. I understand. I’ll tell you about it
after a bit.”

“Amos is really very trying at times,” was Mrs. Marshall’s only comment.

“As for meat, Ca’line,” went on Morey gaily, “don’t bother. Amos and I
are going for trout this morning. We’ll have a fish dinner today.”

“Your father was very fond of trout,” exclaimed Morey’s mother. “I’m
so glad you’re going. By the way, Mortimer, the first day you find
the time Major Carey wants you to call. He’s very fond of you.” Then,
thoughtfully, “Have you any engagement this evening? We might drive
over late today.”

“That’s a go,” exclaimed Morey, springing up, “unless the fishing makes
me too late. Pleasure before business, you know.”

As old Ca’line shambled down the wide hall she shook her head and
mumbled:

“His pappy’s own chile! An’ dat’s what took de paint offen dis house.”




CHAPTER III

MOREY MEETS A FELLOW FISHERMAN.


Mrs. Marshall’s home fronted the west. Always, in the distance, like
a magic curtain ready to rise and reveal a fairyland beyond, hung
the vapory Blue Mountains. Round about, like long fingers, the rough
mountain heights ran down among the century-old plantations. Ridges,
pine-grown and rocky, and here and there tumbling rivulets gave variety
to the long, level reaches of tobacco land.

A little creek, finally trickling into the north part of the
Rappahannock river, skirted what had once been the east boundary of the
old Marshall plantation. In days long gone, before the forests thinned
and while the mountain sides were thick with laurel, ash, and oak, the
creek plunged lustily in and out of its wide and deep pools and went
bounding musically in many a rapid. But now, even as the Marshall acres
had thinned and disappeared, the woodland stream had dwarfed and shrunk
until it was little more than a reminder of its former vigor.

Yet, by all the Marshalls it was remembered as the place where Colonel
Aspley had “whipped the stream for speckled beauties” like a gentleman;
it was still Aspley Creek, and Amos was not the only one who believed
trout might still be taken there. It was not surprising, therefore,
that Lieutenant Fred Purcell, of the U. S. Army, should on this day
drive twenty miles from Linden to try his luck there.

Why this keen-eyed young officer, and many other soldiers who were not
officers, were seen so often in the little railroad town of Linden,
few persons knew. But to this place he had come, when the snows in the
mountains were disappearing in March, with a few brother officers and a
squad of privates and much strange baggage. Mules and wagons followed a
few days later and then the new arrivals disappeared. There were many
theories. Generally it was agreed that it might mean an expedition
against “moonshiners” or illicit distillers. More conservative gossips
predicted that it was a party of military engineers. The local paper
ventured that the war department was about to locate a weather
observatory on the mountains. One thing only became, gradually, common
knowledge--that the soldiers were in camp near Green Springs, in
Squirrel Gap, ten miles back in the foot hills and that the officers
came every few days to the Green Tree Inn, in Linden, to eat and smoke.

Morey, rising from the breakfast table, was almost on Mammy Ca’line’s
heels.

“Mammy,” he shouted, “where’s my old fishin’ clothes?”

The fat old negress turned and then, embarrassed, exclaimed:

“Yo’ ma done say yo’ don’ want dem ol’ pants no mo’. She gib all yo’
ol’ garmen’s to Amos.”

“Everything?” laughed Morey, looking down at his second best trousers.
“I’m goin’ for trout. I can’t wade in these.”

Old Ca’line shook her head.

“I reckon yo’ ma gwine get yo’ new clothes. Yo’ old clothes is Amos
meetin’ pants.”

“Amos!” yelled Morey, rushing through the wide hall and out into the
rear yard. “Amos!” he called, hurrying toward the tumble-down cabin of
the Greens. “Gimme my pants! My fishin’ pants!”

The sober-faced colored boy was just emerging from the single room in
which he and his father lived, with a bit of clothes line around his
shoulders to which was attached an old, cracked, and broken creel, and
carrying in his hand a long-preserved jointed casting rod.

“I say,” repeated Morey, half laughing, “Mammy Ca’line says Mother gave
you my old fishing clothes. Produce--I want ’em.”

The colored boy looked up, alarmed.

“Ah--ah,” he stuttered. “Dem’s my own clothes. Dey’s my onliest meetin’
pants.”

“I should say not,” roared Morey. “Mother didn’t know what she was
doin’. Fork ’em over! I can’t go into the water in these,” he added,
pointing to the trousers he had on. “These ain’t _ready-made_,” he went
on proudly; “they ain’t boughten. I got them from a tailor in Richmond.”

Amos eyed the new trousers with interest and admiration. Then his lip
quivered.

“Marse Morey,” he whimpered, “yo’ ma done gib me dem pants las’
Chrismus’. I speck’s she don’t ’low I’s gwine part wid dem. Dey’s a
present.”

“Look here, boy, don’t make me mad,” retorted Morey. “Turn over my
pants or we don’t go fishin’.”

Amos’ whine ended in a sob. He hesitated and then broke out: “Yo’
ma _gib_ ’em to me. But--.” His voice dropped to a whisper. “Marse
Morey,” he said, coming close to the frowning white boy, “I’s got fo’
bits I made pickin’ berries fo’ Miss Carey--”

Morey’s voice did not change but a smile seemed to hover about his
clean-cut lips.

“Look here, nigger,” he exclaimed suddenly, “do you want those pants
worse than I do?”

“Wuss!” whimpered Amos. “I jes’ nachally got to hab ’em. I done
promised dem pants to Miss ’Mandy Hill.”

“Promised my pants to a girl?”

“Yas sah,” explained Amos soberly. “’Mandy and me’s gwine to de camp
meetin’ Sunday to the Co’t House. I promise her long time ago I’s gwine
wear dem pants when we does.”

“Ah, I see,” laughed Morey at last, “well, don’t disappoint ’Mandy.”

When the two boys left the cabin and cut across the old tobacco field
it would have been hard to tell which was the raggedest, Amos with his
patched blue overalls, almost white from constant washing, or Morey
clad in old Marsh Green’s working corduroys.

At the ruins of the old tobacco shed Amos paused, looked at Morey a
little sheepishly and then, from under a few protecting boards, drew
out an old torn seine about five feet long, attached to two thin
saplings.

Morey’s face flushed at once.

“What you doing with that seine, Amos?” he exclaimed severely.

“What I doin’ wid dat?”

“You’ve been seining trout, you black rascal.”

“Cross my h’at, no sah. Deed I ain’t. No sah.”

“What have you been doing with it?”

“Well sah, some says dey is and some says dey ain’t. But, ef yo’ ain’t
no salt meat, suckers is good eatin’.”

“Suckers!” snorted Morey. “You all ain’t been seinin’ and eatin’
suckers?”

Amos nodded his head.

“You never eat none o’ Mammy Ca’line’s sucker chowder?”

Morey turned up his nose in disgust.

“Can’t mostly tell no difference ’tween Ca’line’s chowder and reg’lar
fish,” the black boy went on appealingly.

As they neared the creek Morey said:

“Amos, if I ever catch you takin’ a trout with that net I’ll thrash
you.”

As Morey went on and the tall colored boy looked down on his slender
companion, his hollow, mournful cheeks rounded into what was almost a
smile and he muttered to himself:

“I reckon dat boy been livin’ high and mighty down to Richmond. Suckers
is gittin’ ’tas’ good to me sence Marse Aspley gone.”

Morey left the tobacco field and took the old meadow path to the big
bend above--Julius Cæsar’s domain and the best part of the creek. Amos
took the road to the ford, two bends below and about an hour’s fishing
from the big pool. If Julius Cæsar existed outside of Amos’ head Morey
could not prove it. With what skill he had he fished the pool, waited
ten minutes and went over the same water again without a strike. Then
he advanced slowly down stream. In three quarters of an hour only two
trout did he hook, neither of them a fish to be proud of.

When he reached the ford where Amos should have been waiting for him
there was no sign of the colored boy and the sun was high overhead. Ten
minutes later, wading softly down the cool and shady little stream and
almost lost in the sportsman’s absorption, his fly shooting forward
swiftly and silently over each eddy and likely log, he was suddenly
aroused by a quick splash and a violent exclamation.

[Illustration: AMOS STRUGGLED TO FREE HIMSELF.]

Just before him, and struggling in the middle of the stream, were two
persons. Amos, who was one of them, almost prostrate in the shallow
water, was struggling to free himself from the grip of a man about
thirty-five years old.

“You black rascal,” exclaimed the man. “What d’you mean. Seinin’, eh?
Take that!”

At the word he planted the flat of his hand on the black boy’s back.
As Amos fell flat in the stream and rolled over in the water there
was a splashing behind his assailant. The man turned just in time to
see Morey, his ragged, baggy trousers wet and impeding his progress,
plugging furiously forward.

“Oh, you’re his pal, eh?” laughed the man. “Well, come on and get the
same. I’ll teach you young whelps to know better. I’ll--.”

But he neither had time to administer the same nor to finish his
speech. The agile Amos with the water running from his clothes and
mouth, had recovered himself and with head down lunged forward. The
next instant both boy and man were locked together and almost submerged
in the sluggish current.

As they rolled over and over Morey made desperate efforts to stop
the struggle. But he only complicated matters. Slipping, he fell
upon the two combatants. Cold water, however, is a great cooler of
angry passions. Without knowing just how it happened, in a moment,
the man and the two boys were standing in mid-stream, sputtering and
gasping for breath. Morey still gripped his rod, the man was glancing
dejectedly toward his own broken pole, now well down the creek and Amos
was gripping a moss-covered rock dug up from the bed of the creek.

“I suppose you know you are trespassing on private property?” began
Morey, forgetting, in his indignation, that the creek no longer was a
part of his mother’s plantation.

The man, shaking himself, turned as if surprised.

“This boy is my servant. Have you any explanation to make?”

The man’s surprise increased to astonishment. After another look at
Morey’s ragged garments he fixed his eyes upon the lad’s face.

“He was seining trout--” began the stranger indignantly.

“Da’s a lie,” exclaimed Amos.

“He was fishing for suckers,” explained Morey.

“Look in his pockets,” retorted the stranger.

Morey hesitated a moment.

“My name is Mortimer Marshall, sir, of Aspley Place. This boy is my
mother’s servant. He--”

At that moment Morey saw a suspicious movement of Amos’ hand.

“Amos,” he exclaimed sternly, “come here!”

Slowly the black boy splashed forward, the rock still in his hand, but
with one cautious eye on the stranger.

Morey ran his hand into the colored boy’s pocket and drew slowly forth
a still flopping three-quarter pound trout.

“Fo’ de lan’s sake, Marse Morey, who done put dat fish in dar?”

The man did not smile.

“I’m really sorry, my boy, that I struck you. I’m a great lover of this
sport and I lost my head. I apologize to you. And to you,” he added,
turning to Morey.

Morey turned again to Amos.

“Where did you get that trout, Amos?”

“Cross my ha’t, Marse Morey, I reckon dat fish done swum in ma’ pocket.
Trouts is cute fishes.”

Morey picked up Amos’ seine, still tangled among the rocks, and
grasping the rotten sticks to which it was attached, he broke them
over his knee. Then he pointed to the bank and Amos crawled dejectedly
ashore.

“My name is Purcell, Lieutenant Purcell, of the United States Army,”
said the stranger.

“I am glad to know you,” replied Morey reaching out his hand. “I am
fond of fishing myself.”




CHAPTER IV

A SECRET AMBITION REVEALED.


As Lieutenant Purcell and Morey clambered out on the bank the military
man began laughing heartily.

“I suppose they are a pretty wide fit,” remarked Morey holding out
Marsh Green’s loosely hanging trousers with one hand.

“I was laughing at my mistake in thinking you were a ‘pot’ fisher,”
explained the soldier. “But I’d known if I had seen your rod--it’s a
beauty.”

Morey handed Lieutenant Purcell his father’s old split bamboo, silver
ferruled, and colored a rich brown from long use.

“Since we caused you to lose your own rod I want you to take mine,”
said Morey promptly. “It is a little heavy and old-fashioned but it has
landed many a fine fish. It was my father’s.”

“Your father is dead?”

“Yes sir. My mother lives--Aspley Place is our home.”

“Well, I want to shake hands with you, sir, and to say again I am
heartily sorry I lost my head. Losing my rod serves me right. I
couldn’t think of taking yours. It’s a beauty,” he added, taking the
rod in his hands.

“But I want you to,” exclaimed Morey. “My father was a sportsman. He
loved his horse, rod and gun. I don’t know what Amos meant. I reckon
it’s the first time a trout was ever taken out of Aspley Creek in a
net. I’ll feel better if you’ll take the rod. If you don’t,” he added,
his eyes snapping, “I’ll take it and break it over that nigger’s back.”

Amos, skulking within earshot--the rock still in his hand--hurried away
among the pines.

“I insist that the fault was all mine. But I’ll compromise. I am
stationed near Linden, some miles from here, on special duty. It was a
long drive over here and a man will be waiting for me some miles down
the stream. I’d like to fish the creek down to my rendezvous. If you
lend me your rod I’ll send it to you tomorrow.”

“At least,” said Morey, giving ready assent, “you will consider
yourself as having at all times, for yourself and friends, the use of
the creek. And when you are nearby,” he continued, pointing among the
trees toward the west, “my mother will be glad to have you call at
our home. A real fisherman will always find a welcome there. I’ve got
better pants at home,” laughed Morey.

The soldier shrugged his shoulders and laughed in turn. Then he lifted
the lid of Morey’s broken creel and saw the two small trout. In turn
he exposed his own catch--seven beautiful fish, one weighing at least
a pound and a quarter. Before Morey could stop him the lieutenant had
dumped his own string into the boy’s basket.

“With my compliments to your mother, my boy.”

The pride of the Marshalls rose in the water-soaked, ragged boy’s heart.

“On one condition, sir; that you will take dinner with us this evening.”

The man hesitated.

“Not today, thank you. I’m deuced glad to meet a son of one of our old
families--I’m a Virginian myself--but, not today.”

“You are stationed at Linden, you say?”

“For a time. I may leave any day. If I do I hope we may meet again.
Won’t you take my card?”

He handed Morey a card reading: “Lieutenant Fred Purcell, U. S. Signal
Corps, Fort Meyer, Virginia.”

“It will be a favor to me if you’ll take the rod,” insisted Morey.

“The obligation is all mine,” insisted the stranger. “And, if we meet
again I hope I can find opportunity to return the favor in some way.”

When the two finally parted company Morey had little reason to suspect
how much that statement meant, nor how soon he was to avail himself of
Lieutenant Purcell’s kind offices.

A half hour later Morey reached his home and entered the musty, quiet
horse lot. There was hardly a breath of air and the sun lay on the
place with almost midsummer heat. A few chickens pecked in silence but
no other living thing was in sight. Until then the boy had not realized
how desolate and run-down was the place where once the activities of
a busy plantation centered. There were hardly signs even, of the farm
implements that had rotted away for years. The yard seemed abandoned.

With a little lump in his throat the boy hurried forward, his long,
ragged trousers gathering new dust and weight as he did do. As he
climbed the broken-down fence and got a view of the big, paintless,
loose-boarded house beyond he almost sighed. But there at least were
flowers and he could hear the hum of bees among the hollyhocks by the
garden fence. There he could see Marsh, his old hat well down on his
head, bent over his hoe, as the colored man rose at times among the
rank weeds. Beyond the garden patch, in the low meadow, he could see,
too, old Betty and Jim the mule. Amos was not in sight.

“Old Marsh is getting pretty careless,” said Morey to himself. “There’s
a good many things he ought to do around here. Lazy niggers,” he mused.

It did not occur to Morey that he might do some of these things
himself. Such had not been the lad’s training. With another sigh he
made his way to Marsh Green’s cabin. Never before had it looked so poor
and desolate.

“Marsh ought to fix up his old place,” Morey muttered. Then he turned
and looked at the big house. The wide shingles, green with moss, were
missing in many places. The big chimney, with one side of the top
missing, stood like a monument to the departed glories of other days.
On the grey-green roof a few chimney bricks lay where they had fallen.
But, around the far corner where the gallery showed, the honeysuckle,
crawling over the columns and roof, hung a deep green curtain of new
fragrance. And, through the crookedly hanging shutters which were the
color of dead grass, he saw fresh white curtains.

For the first time in his life the sight of the bricks on the roof
annoyed Morey. With a sharp reprimand on his tongue he was about to
call to the busy Marsh when a sound fell upon his ear. There was some
one in the cabin. Stealing around behind the crumbling shack Morey
cautiously approached it and peered through a crack. Amos, crooning
to himself, was standing in the middle of the hard, clay floor with
Morey’s Richmond trousers held up, before him in his outstretched hands.

Amos’ eyes were set. On his solemn black face there was a look
of longing. His temptation was too great. Squatting on the floor
the colored boy emptied the contents of the trousers’ pockets
on the clay; seventy-five cents in money--dimes, nickels and a
shining quarter--Morey’s key ring, a silver pencil case, note-book,
handkerchief, rubber eraser and his new pocket knife, the last thing he
had bought in Richmond.

Each thing the colored lad fondled, felt and smelled. Then he opened
the knife, tested it and held it off at arm’s length. Gradually he
returned each object to its place, the knife last of all. He sprang to
his feet, and Morey was just about to call out, but stopped. The black
boy, giving way to temptation, plunged his hand again into a pocket of
the trousers and pulled out the new knife. He shoved the knife into his
own pocket and dropped the trousers where Morey had left them.

Chuckling to himself, Morey, a few moments later, sauntered into the
cabin.

“Amos,” said Morey, “did that man hurt you when he pushed you over?”

“Push me?” said Amos. “He done hit me wid his fis’.”

“Did he hurt you?” persisted Morey, doffing Marsh’s unwieldly trousers.

For answer Amos produced and exhibited the mossy boulder that he had
carried from the creek.

“Don’ mak no diffunce ’bout dat. But ef dat man ebber comes dis way,”
and he shook his head belligerently, “yo’ don’ need ast him no sich
quesson. He ain’t gwine to be hurted--he gwine to be kilt--da’s right.”

“Anyway don’t stab him,” said Morey putting on his own trousers.

“I ain’t no stabbin’ colored boy,” began Amos with dignity, “an’ I
ain’t gwine hit no pusson when he ain’t lookin!”

“Good. Never do any thing behind another man’s back.”

The colored boy shifted a little uneasily but Morey only laughed and
said no more. As the two boys passed out of the cabin Morey pointed to
the distant home.

“Amos,” he said, “why don’t you get up there and take those bricks
down?”

“Yo’ ma don’ tell me to take no bricks down. How I gwine to git ’way up
dar? ’Sides, I ain’t got no time--.”

“Well, I tell you--”

“Miss Marshall, don’ tell me--.”

“Git, boy!” snapped Morey nodding toward the house.

But Amos hung back, digging his toes into the dust, with a defiant look
on his face. Morey began to feel in his pockets and his face assumed a
puzzled look.

“I reckon I must have dropped my new knife in the cabin,” said Morey,
turning back.

There was a swift pat-pat of bare feet and, as Morey glanced over his
shoulder he saw Amos in a cloud of dust loping at the top of his speed
toward the house.

Morey followed the flying colored boy who in a few minutes was
scrambling up the kitchen roof. Mammy Ca’line was in the kitchen
ironing and singing softly to herself. Throwing the now stiff trout on
a table Morey said:

“Here you are, Mammy, trout for supper.”

“Ain’t you all gwine to Major Carey’s dis ebenin’?”

Morey’s jaw fell. He had forgotten about the proposed call.

“Anyway,” he said, “we aren’t going there for supper.”

“Wha’ fo’ yo’ gwine den? Yo’ ma’ she always stay fo’ eatin’.”

“Where is mother?” asked Morey.

“Sh! sh!” whispered Mammy Ca’line, “yo ma been gettin’ her beauty
sleep, chile.”

“You cook the fish, Mammy; we’ll go after supper.”

The old colored woman looked up with a shrewd smile.

“Yo’ all bettah go ’long to Major Carey’s tomorrow, lessen yo’ git
’nother mess o’ fish. Major Carey ain’t gwine to turn no one way from
de table. De Carey’s has fish when dey wants dem. We all has ’em when
we kin get ’em.”

Morey grew thoughtful. But, passing on into the hall he made his way
lightly upstairs, that he might not disturb his mother, and entered his
own little room.

It certainly looked restful, after his day’s activity, and throwing
himself on the big, high-posted bed, he prepared to rest. But Morey was
not used to passing the daylight hours thus and in a few minutes he was
up and busy. His unpacked trunk was before him and he squatted on the
floor beside it.

About five o’clock Mrs. Marshall, fresh and smiling, dressed in white
and with a spray of honeysuckle in her dress, softly opened the
door. On the floor, fast asleep, lay Morey. About him, in the direst
confusion and disorder, were books, circulars, catalogues and newspaper
clippings. The floor was littered with what had apparently been the
principal contents of the boy’s trunk.

Mrs. Marshall picked her way among them; automobile catalogues, price
list of motors, advertisements of balloon manufacturers, descriptions
of aeroplane and dirigible balloon motors; newspaper clippings relating
to airships and their flights; motor-boat pictures. By the unconscious
boy’s arm lay a paper backed volume, “Aeroplanes; their Manufacture
and Use.” Not less than fifty such items constituted the litter on the
floor.

Mrs. Marshall touched Morey on the forehead. He sprang up, rubbed his
eyes and yawned.

“Is this your school library?” asked his mother, laughing.

“Some of it,” answered Morey soberly. “I borrowed the rest.”

Mrs. Marshall looked surprised.

“Does this interest you?” she went on, picking up a picture of a
revolving gyroscopic motor as if it were dynamite.

“Interest me?” exclaimed Morey. “I reckon it interests any one in my
business.”

“Your business?”

“Surely. That’s what I’m goin’ to be.”

Mrs. Marshall could only look at him, dazed and bewildered.

“Haven’t had time to tell you,” smiled Morey. “I’m an aviator. I’m
going to make an aeroplane this summer.”




CHAPTER V

A VISIT OF CEREMONY.


“You don’t mean to tell me you don’t know what ‘aeroplane’ means?”
almost shouted Morey, when he saw from his mother’s look that she was
puzzled. “Well, I’ll be--”

“Mortimer!” exclaimed Mrs. Marshall with as much sternness as she ever
used.

“Mater,” he laughed, “you certainly are behind the times.”

“What does it mean?” she asked placidly.

“I suppose you never heard of ‘aviator’ either?”

“I’ve heard of ‘aviary’. I believe that has something to do with birds.”

“Right! Though I never heard of an aviary,” added Morey, partly to
himself. “It _is_ a bird. It’s a human bird. An ‘aviator’ is a man who
drives an aeroplane.”

“And this--this airy--?”

“Mother, sit down,” answered Morey in despair, “and I’ll begin your
aeronautical education.”

For the next quarter of an hour Mrs. Marshall dodged and parried
verbal volleys of airship talk. Beginning with hot air balloons Morey
led his mother along through a history of aeronautics until he came to
aeroplanes. And then, not satisfied with the bewildered condition of
his patient parent, he began with the dreams of the enthusiast.

“In war and peace, in commerce and pleasure, from the Pole to the
tropics, these human birds will darken the air on pinions swifter than
the eagle’s wing. The snow-crested peaks of the Himalayas, the deepest
recesses of the tropic wilderness, the uncharted main and the untrodden
ice of the hidden Poles will unroll before the daring aviator like
the--like--the--”

“The pictured pleasures of the panorama,” continued his mother,
pointing to the underscored page of the “History of Aeroplanes” which
she had been holding during Morey’s discourse.

“Yes,” said Morey, blushing, and then recovering himself. “Anyway,
that’s my plan of a career. I’m going to be an ‘aviator’. And I’m going
to begin at the bottom. I’m going to start by making an aeroplane right
here--out in the old carpenter shop.”

“Mortimer, I suppose I am just a little behind the times. Is this a
desirable thing?”

“Beats the world.”

“Have you been studying this at school?”

“’Taint in the course, but everybody’s studying it.”

“When did you interest yourself in such a peculiar subject?”

“Oh, ages ago--long before Christmas,” answered Morey. “I’ve read all
the books in the public library at Richmond and all the magazines, and
I’ve got all the circulars I could find. All I want now is a set of
tools and some spruce lumber and some silk and an engine--I can do it.
Needn’t fear I can’t.”

“And these things,” suggested Mrs. Marshall, her smooth brow wrinkling
just a trifle, “do they require any considerable outlay of funds?”

“Well,” said Morey--hesitating a little now--“The tools won’t cost
much, but I wanted to ask you about the engine. Of course,” and he put
his arm affectionately about his mother’s shoulders, “I know it isn’t
just as if father was with us, and I ain’t figuring on the best engine.
I would like a revolving motor, that’s the newest thing, one with a
gyroscopic influence, but that costs a good deal.”

“How much?” asked his mother taking the illustrated price list of
engines that Morey handed her.

“Twelve hundred dollars.”

His mother gasped and the circular dropped from her hand.

“I thought myself that was too much,” quickly exclaimed Morey,
puckering his lips. “But, mater, I’m not going to be extravagant. I’ve
arranged for a cheap one, a second-hand one. It’s at Hammondsport. I
saw it when I was visiting at Uncle’s.”

His mother sighed, looked for a moment out toward the ruined and
ramshackle barn and then, with a new smile, asked indifferently:

“And the price of this--approximately?”

“This one,” answered Morey, proudly, “is a real Curtiss six-cylinder,
and it’s a regular aeroplane engine. It’s cheap, because the man it
was made for didn’t take it. Cousin Jack knows a boy who works in Mr.
Curtiss’ shop. I saw Mr. Curtiss about it myself. It was such a bargain
that I--I--well I bought it.”

Mrs. Marshall breathed a little heavily and rearranged her dress.

“You didn’t mention the price,” she said at last, patting Morey’s hand.

“Only four hundred dollars!”

His mother laughed nervously. “I’m afraid my boy is a little
extravagant,” she remarked slowly.

“Do you know what that engine’s worth!” exclaimed Morey. “It’s worth
$800 any day.”

“Well, I suppose the young men of today must have their amusements.
Your father’s was horses and hunting. But it did not interfere with
his business as a planter. I trust you will not become extreme in the
fancy. It must not be carried too far.”

“Too far? I’m not going to do anything else until I get rich.”

“Nothing else? You mean no other amusement?”

“That’s not amusement; it’s business. It’s going to be my job.”

“You mean along with tobacco planting?”

“I should say not. What, me a farmer? Tobacco is played out.”

“Mortimer Marshall!”

“You don’t think I’m going to be a planter, do you?”

“Mortimer!” Mrs. Marshall was erect in her chair, her cheeks pale.

“Why, mater, I had no idea that you felt that way. You don’t mean that
I’m to come back here and take old Marsh Green’s place. I can’t grow
tobacco. I don’t know how and I don’t want to. Young men don’t do those
things nowadays. They get out and hustle.”

“Mortimer, your father was a planter from boyhood until he died. His
father was one and his father’s father. Aspley Place has grown tobacco
for one hundred and fifty years. In Virginia it is a gentleman’s life.”

“No, mater,” answered Morey in a low and kind voice. “It was. But it
isn’t now. You love this place--so do I. But I’ve been out in the
world, a little--you haven’t. Things have gone on all around us and we
didn’t know it. I can’t be a tobacco planter. I won’t.”

Mrs. Marshall’s lips trembled but she said nothing.

“I’ll go to school, mater; I’ll even go to college if you like. But
then I want to go to an engineering school. After that I’m going to
make you famous. I’m going to make the perfect flying machine. Then
we’ll move away from this old place--”

“Mortimer!” quivered his mother. “From Aspley Place? Your father’s
home? Never!” Then, with an effort, she became calm. Rising, as if
both hurt and indignant, she exclaimed:

“My son, I am your mother and your guardian. I have my own plans for
your future--your father’s plans. From now you will dismiss these
ideas. I shall countermand your foolish purchase or ask your uncle to
do so. This summer you will spend with me. You will return to your
school and then to the University. When, in time, you graduate and are
able to do so you will return here and assume charge of the patrimony
bequeathed you by your father. Meanwhile, Mr. Green will remain in
charge.”

And leaving Morey standing crestfallen among the jumble of books and
papers, his mother walked sadly from the room.

It was the first time Mortimer had ever been balked in his life. For
six months he had thought and dreamed of nothing else. His pride was
hurt, too, for to his cousin Jack, in Hammondsport, he had outlined
carefully the exact details of his future plans. He had managed to
secure an invitation from Jack Marshall to visit Hammondsport soon
after his investigation into aeroplane and airship affairs had revealed
to him that in that little town Inventor Curtiss had his motor
shop and aeroplane factory and that other balloon manufacturers and
experimenters had collected there in sufficient numbers to make it
the aeronautical center of America. There he had seen real dirigible
balloons, had met and talked with Carl Meyers, the oldest balloon
navigator in the country, had witnessed flights of the Curtiss
aeroplane, had gazed upon the renowned Professor Graham Bell, had
lounged for days about the mysterious and fascinating shops and
factories, and, best of all and most unforgettable, had tasted the joys
of gliding on the kites and planes of the various aeronautical experts.

Then he recalled the mocking laugh of his uncle.

He was a stubborn boy, but--he did not know whether he was a
disobedient one. In all his life he had never been tested. Flushed and
sick with disappointment he caught up his precious books and circulars
and was banging them into the trunk when the door opened and Amos stuck
his head into the room:

“Marse Morey, yo’ ma says yo’ all gwine ober to Marse Major Carey’s
soon as yo’ has yo’ supper. An’ yo’s to put on yo’ bestest cloe’s an’
slick up.”

Bang! went “Aeroplanes, their Manufacture and Use.” It missed the
colored boy’s head and crashed against the door jamb.

“Here, you black rascal,” shouted Morey, red in the face and full of
anger, “come back here and give me my knife, you thief!”

But the accusation was lost. Amos was on the long stair rail shooting
to the bottom like a sack of wheat.

When the old-fashioned supper bell clanged out in the hall below,
Morey, white of face, marched downstairs and into the dining room in
silence. At the humble board with Morey’s trout, almost the only dish,
on the snowy white cloth before her, sat his mother, also pale, but
with her usual smile. A look of surprise swept over her face as she
noticed that Morey had ignored her orders.

“The evening is very agreeable,” said his mother softly. “It will be
light for some time. Major Carey has asked you to come and see him. We
are going immediately after supper. I have ordered out the carriage.”

“Won’t tomorrow do?” said Morey sharply--and then he was sorry.

“If you prefer,” answered his mother. “Your trout are delicious.”

“Oh, I’ll go tonight,” said Morey, ashamed of his anger.

“The Careys are our oldest friends,” went on his mother, smiling again.
“I had hoped you would look your best. When Major Carey does me the
honor to appear in our home he comes clothed as a gentleman. He carries
his gold-headed cane. His linen is immaculate.”

“It won’t take me but a minute,” said Morey, crowding back a tear of
mortification but disposing of a couple of crisp trout nevertheless.
“I’ll be ready as soon as you are.”

He was about to dash from the room when he turned, hastened to his
mother’s side and kissed her on the cheek.

“That’s a good boy, Mortimer. I’m glad you realize that I know best.”

While Morey was making his hasty toilet he heard a creaking sound
outside. Rushing to the window he was about to break out into laughter.
Then he stopped and a little flush came into his face. Slowly advancing
along the road from the stable lot was his mother’s carriage. It was
the old surrey that his father had once used in transporting the hounds
to the distant meets. Paintless, its bottom gaping, its top cracked and
split and its wheels wobbling, it groaned forward toward the mounting
block at the end of the gallery. To it was hitched fat Betty, sleek
and shiny with rubbing. The harness used only on such occasions, still
withstood the final ravages of time, for on one bridle blinder shone
one glittering polished silver M--old Marsh’s pride and joy.

What had amused Morey was the sight of the old servitor, “Colonel
Marshall’s overseer,” Marsh Green. His shoes were shining, and a fresh
white shirt showed resplendent beneath his worn coat, but the old man’s
chief glory was his battered silk hat. By his side rode Amos, splendid
in his shoes and Morey’s trousers--his “meetin’ pants.”

What had brought the flush to Morey’s face was the sudden thought:
“the Careys do not come to Aspley Place in such a turnout.” And, for
the first time in his life, Morey felt ashamed of the old home and its
surroundings.
