CHAPTER X.


On the evening of the third day after the arrival of the Gothic escort
sent by Totila, Valerius had terminated his arrangements and fixed the
next morning for his departure from the villa.

He was sitting with Valeria and Julius at the evening meal, and
speaking of the prospect of preserving peace, which was no doubt
undervalued by the young hero, Totila, who was filled with the ardour
of war. The old Roman could not endure the thought of seeing armed
Greeks enter his beloved country.

"I, too, wish for peace," said Valeria reflectively, "and yet----"

"Well?" asked Valerius.

"I am certain," continued the girl, "that if war broke out you would
then learn to love Totila as he deserves. He would defend me and
Italy----

"Yes," said Julius, "he has an heroic nature, and something still
greater than that----"

"I know of nothing greater!" cried Valerius.

At that moment clattering footsteps were heard in the atrium, and
young Thorismuth, the leader of the Gothic escort, and Totila's
shield-bearer, entered abruptly.

"Valerius," he said, "let the carriages be harnessed, the litters
brought out; you must go at once."

They all started from their seats.

"What has happened? Have they landed?"

"Speak," said Julius, "what do you fear?"

"Nothing for myself," answered the Goth, smiling.

"I did not wish to startle you sooner than was necessary. But now I
dare no longer be silent. Yesterday early, the waves washed a corpse
ashore----"

"A corpse!"


"A Goth, one of our sailors; it was Alb, the steersman of Totila's
ship."

Valeria grew pale, but did not tremble.

"It may be an accident--the man was drowned."

"No," said the Goth, "he was not drowned; hi» breast was pierced by an
arrow."

"That means a naval combat, nothing more," said Valerius.

"But to-day----"

"To-day?" cried Julius.

"To-day none of the country people who usually pass on their way from
Regium to Colum, made their appearance, and a trooper, whom I sent to
Regium for news, has never returned.

"That still proves nothing," said Valerius obstinately. His heart
rebelled against the thought of a landing of his hated enemies. "The
waves have often before rendered the way impassable."

"But just now I have been some distance on the road to Regium, and when
I laid my ear to the ground, I felt it tremble under the tramp of many
horses approaching in mad haste. You must fly!"

Valerius and Julius now took down their weapons, which hung upon the
pillars of the room. Valeria sighed deeply, and pressed her hand to her
heart.

"What is to be done?" she asked.

"Man the Pass of Jugum," cried Valerius, "through which the coast-road
runs. It is very narrow, and can be held for some time."

"Eight of my men are already there; I will join them as soon as you are
mounted. The other half of my troop shall escort you on your journey.
Haste!"

But ere they could leave the room, a Gothic soldier, covered with blood
and mire, rushed in.

"Fly!" he cried, "they are there!"

"Who is there, Gelaris!" asked Thorismuth.

"The Greeks! Belisarius! the devil!"

"Speak," ordered Thorismuth.

"I got to the pine-wood before Regium without seeing anything
suspicious, but also without meeting with a soul upon the way. As,
looking eagerly forward, I rode past a thick tree, I felt a pull at my
neck as if my head would be torn from my shoulders, and the next minute
I lay on the road under my horse."

"Badly sat, Gelaris," scolded Thorismuth.

"Oh yes, of course! A noose of horse-hair round his neck, and an arrow
whistling past his head, and a better rider would fall than Gelaris,
son of Genzo! Two demons--wood-devils or goblins they seemed to
me--rushed out of the bushes and over the ditch, tied me upon my horse,
took me between their little shaggy ponies, and ho!----"

"Those are Belisarius's Huns!" cried Valerius.

"Away they went with me. When I came to myself again, I was in Regium
in the midst of the enemy, and there I learned everything. The
Queen-regent is murdered, war is declared, the enemy has taken Sicily
by surprise, the whole island has gone over to the Emperor----"

"And the fortress, Panormus?"

"Was taken by the fleet, which made its way into the harbour. The
mast-heads were higher than the walls of the town. From thence they
shot their arrows, and jumped on to the walls."

"And Syracusæ?" asked Valerius.

"Fell through the treachery of the Sicilians; the Gothic garrison is
murdered. Belisarius rode into Syracusæ amidst a shower of flowers,
and--for it was the last days of his consulate--threw gold coins about
him, amidst the applause of the population."

"And where is the commodore: where is Totila?"

"Two of his ships were sent to the bottom by the pointed prows of the
triremes; his own and one other. He sprang into the sea in full
armour--and is--not yet--fished up again."

Valeria sank speechless upon a couch.

"The Greek general," continued the messenger, "landed yesterday, in the
dark and stormy night, near Regium. The town received him with
acclamation. He will only halt until he has re-ordered his army, and
will then march at once to Neapolis. His vanguard--the yellow-skinned
troopers who caught me--were to advance at once and take the Pass of
Jugum. I was to be their guide. But I led them far away--to the
west--into the sea-swamps--and escaped--in the darkness of evening.
But--they shot--arrows after me--and one hit--I can speak--no more----"
and he fell clattering to the ground.

"He is a dead man," cried Valerius, "they carry poisoned arrows! Up!
Julius and Thorismuth! take my child to Neapolis. I myself will go to
the pass, and cover your retreat."

In vain were Valeria's prayers; the face and mien of the old man
assumed an expression of iron resolve.

"Obey!" he cried, "I am the master of this place, and the son of this
soil, and I will ask the Huns of Belisarius what they have to do in my
fatherland! No, Julius! I must know that you are with Valeria.
Farewell!"

While Valeria and Julius, with their Gothic escort and most of
the slaves, fled at full speed on the road to Neapolis, Valerius
hurried, at the head of half-a-dozen slaves, out of the garden of the
villa, towards the pass, which--not far from the beginning of his
estates--formed an arch over the road to Regium. The rock on the left
hand, to the north, was inaccessible, and on the right, to the south,
it fell abruptly into the sea, whose waves often overflowed the road.
But the mouth of the pass was so narrow, that two men, standing side by
side with their shields, could close it like a door. Thus Valerius
might hope to keep the pass, even against a much superior force, long
enough to afford the swift horses of the fugitives a sufficient start.

As the old man was hastening through the moonless night along the
narrow path which led between the sea and his vineyards to the pass, he
remarked to the right hand, on the sea, at a considerable distance from
the land, the bright beam of a little light, which unmistakably shone
from the mast-head of some vessel. Valerius started. Were the
Byzantines pushing forward to Neapolis by sea? Were they about to land
soldiers at his back? But if so, would not more lights be visible?

He turned to question the slaves, who, at his order, but with visible
reluctance, had followed him from the villa. In vain; they had
disappeared into the darkness of the night. They had deserted their
master as soon as they were unobserved.

So Valerius arrived alone at the pass, the nether or western end of
which was guarded by two Goths, while two more filled the eastern
entrance towards the enemy, and the other four kept the inner space.

Scarcely had Valerius joined the two in front, when suddenly the tramp
of horses was heard close at hand, and soon, round the next turning of
the road, there appeared two horsemen, advancing at full trot.

Each carried a torch in his right hand; and these torches alone threw
light upon the midnight scene, for the Goths avoided everything that
could betray their small number.

"By Belisarius's beard!" cried the foremost rider, checking his horse
to a walk, "this hen-ladder is here so narrow, that an honest horse has
scarcely room in it; and there is a hollow way or---- Halt! What moves
there?"

He stopped his horse, and bent carefully forward, holding the torch far
out before him. In this position, close before the entrance of the
pass, he presented an easy aim.

"Who is there!" he again asked.

For all reply a Gothic spear pierced through the mail of his
breast-plate and into his heart.

"Enemies!" screamed the dying man, and fell backwards from his saddle.

"Enemies! enemies!" cried the man behind him, and, hurling his
treacherous torch far from him, turned his animal and galloped back;
while the horse of the fallen man remained quietly standing at his
master's side.

Nothing was heard in the stillness of the night but the tramp of the
fleeing charger, and the gentle splash of the waves at the foot of the
rocks.

The hearts of the men in the pass beat with expectation.

"Now be cool, men," said Valerius; "let none be tempted out of the
pass. You in the first row will press your shields firmly together; we
in the middle will throw; you three in the rear will hand us the
spears, and be attentive to all that takes place."

"Sir! sir!" cried the Goth who stood in the road behind the pass, "the
light! the ship approaches ever nearer!"

"Be wary, and challenge it, if----"

But the enemy was already at hand. It was a troop of fifty mounted
Huns, carrying a few torches. As they turned round the corner of the
road, the scene was illuminated with patches of glaring light,
contrasted with deep gloom.

"It was here, sir!"  said the horseman who had escaped. "Be cautious."

"Take back the dead man and the horse," commanded a rough voice, and
the leader, lifting his torch, rode slowly towards the entrance of the
pass.

"Halt!"  cried Valerius in Latin; "who are you, and what do you want?"

"_I_ have to ask that!" returned the leader of the horsemen in the same
language.

"I am a Roman citizen, and defend my fatherland against all invaders!"
cried Valerius.

Meanwhile the leader had examined the scene by the light of his torch.
His practised eye recognised the impossibility of avoiding the pass,
either to the right or to the left; and, at the same time, the extreme
straitness of its entrance.

"Then, friend," he said, retreating a little, "we are allies. We are
Romans too, and will free Italy from its oppressors. Therefore give way
and let us through."

Valerius, who wished to gain time by all possible means, spoke again.

"Who are you, and who sent you?"

"My name is Johannes. The enemies of Justinian call me 'the bloody,'
and I lead Belisarius's light horse. The whole country, from Regium
till here, has received us with rejoicing; this is the first hindrance.
We should have got much farther long ago had not a dog of a Goth led us
into the vilest swamp that ever swallowed up a good horse. Valuable
time was lost. So do not hinder us! Life and property will be spared to
you, and you will receive a rich reward into the bargain, if you will,
guide us. Speed is victory! The enemy is bewildered; they must not have
time to recover themselves before we stand before Neapolis, yea, even
before Rome. 'Johannes,' said Belisarius to me, 'as I cannot order the
storm-wind to sweep the land before me, I order _you_ to do it!' So get
away and let us through!"

And he spurred his horse.

"Tell Belisarius--so long as Cnejus Valerius lives, he shall not
advance one step in Italy! Back, you robbers!"

"Madman! would you stand by the Goths and oppose us?"

"By hell, if against you!"

The leader again cast searching glances to the right and left.

"Listen," he said; "you can really stop us here for a time. But not for
long. If you yield, you shall live. If not, I will first have you
skinned alive, and then impaled!"

He lifted his torch, looking for a weak point.

"Back!" cried Valerius; "shoot, friend!"

"The twang of a bow-string was heard, and an arrow struck the helm of
the horseman.

"The devil!" he exclaimed, and spurred his horse back.

"Dismount!" he ordered, "every man of you!"

But the Huns did not like to part with their horses.

"What, sir? Dismount?" asked one of the nearest.

Johannes struck him in the face. The man did not move.

"Dismount!" thundered Johannes again. "Would you go into that
mouse-hole on horseback!" and he flung himself out of the saddle. "Six
climb the trees and shoot from above. Six lie down and creep forward on
each side of this road, shooting as they lie. Ten shoot standing;
breast high. Ten guard the horses. You others follow me with the spear
as soon as the strings twang. Forwards!"

He handed his torch to one of the men and took a lance.

While the Huns were carrying out his orders, Johannes again examined
the pass as well as he could.

"Yield!" he cried.

"Come on!" shouted the Goths.

Johannes gave a sign and twenty arrows whistled at once.

A cry, and the foremost Goth on the right fell. He had been struck in
the forehead by one of the men on the trees. Valerius, under shelter of
his shield, sprang into his place. He came just at the right moment to
repulse the furious attack of Johannes, who ran at the gap with his
lance in rest. Valerius received the thrust on his shield, and struck
at the Byzantine, who stumbled and fell, close to the entrance. The
Huns behind him fell back.

The Goth who stood at Valerius's side could not resist the temptation
to render the leader harmless. He sprang a step forward out of the pass
with up-lifted spear. But this was just what Johannes wanted. Up he
started with lightning swiftness, thrust the surprised Goth over the
low wall of the road on the right of the pass, and the next moment he
stood on the exposed side of Valerius--who was defending himself
against the renewed attack of the Huns--and stabbed him with all his
might in the groin with his long Persian knife.

Valerius fell; but the three Goths who stood behind him succeeded in
pushing Johannes--who had already pressed forward into the middle of
the pass--back and out with the beaks of their shields.

Johannes retired to his men, in order to command a new salvo of arrows.
Two of the Goths silently placed themselves in the entrance of the
pass; the third held the bleeding Valerius in his arms.

Just then the guard at the rear of the pass rushed in: "The ship, sir!
the ship! They have landed! they take us in the rear! Fly! we will
carry you--a hiding-place in the rocks----"

"No," said Valerius, raising himself, "I will die here; rest my sword
against the wall and----"

But a loud flourish of Gothic horns was heard in the rear. Torches
shone, and a troop of thirty Goths hurried into the pass, Totila at
their head. His first glance fell upon Valerius.

"Too late! too late!" he cried in deep grief. "Revenge! Follow me!
Forwards!" And he rushed furiously through the pass, followed by his
spear-bearing foot-soldiers.

Fearful was the shock of meeting upon the narrow road between sea and
rocks. The torches were extinguished in the skirmish; and the dawning
day gave but a faint grey light.

The Huns, although superior in numbers to their bold adversaries, were
completely taken by surprise. They thought that a whole army of Goths
was on the march. They hastened to join their horses and fly. But the
Goths reached the place where the animals stood at the same moment as
their owners, and, in confused heaps, men and horses were driven off
the road into the sea. In vain Johannes himself struck at his flying
people; their rush threw him to the ground; he sprang up immediately
and attacked the nearest Goth. But he had fallen into bad hands. It was
Totila; he recognised him.

"Cursed Flax-head!" he cried, "so you are not drowned?"

"No, as you see!" cried Totila, and struck a blow at the other's helm,
which cleft it through and entered slightly into his skull, so that he
staggered and fell.

With this all resistance was at an end. The nearest of the horsemen
just managed to lift Johannes into a saddle, and galloped off with him.

The scene of action was deserted.

Totila hurried back to the pass. He found Valerius, pale, with closed
eyes, his head resting on his shield. He threw himself on his knees
beside him, and pressed his stiffening hand to his heart.

"Valerius!" he cried, "father! do not, do not leave me so. Speak to me
once more!"

The dying man faintly opened his eyes.

"Where are they?" he asked.

"Beaten and fled!"

"Ah! victory!" cried Valerius, breathing anew. "I die happy! And
Valeria--my child--is she saved?"

"She is. Escaped from the naval combat, and from the sea itself, I
hastened to warn Neapolis and save you. I had landed near the high-road
between your house and Neapolis; there I met Valeria and learned your
danger. One of my boats received her and her companions on board to
take them to Neapolis; with the other I came here to save you--oh! only
to revenge you!" and he laid his head upon the breast of the dying man.

"Do not weep for me; I die victorious! And to you, my son, I owe it."

He stroked the long fair locks of the sorrowing youth.

"And Valeria's safety too! Oh! to you also, I hope, I shall owe the
salvation of Italy. You are hero enough to save this country--in spite
of Belisarius and Narses! You can--and you will--and your reward is the
hand of my beloved child."

"Valerius! my father!"

"She is yours! But swear to me"--and Valerius raised himself with an
effort and looked into Totila's eyes--"swear to me by the genius of
Valeria that she shall not become your wife until Italy is free, and
not a sod of her sacred soil is pressed by the foot of a Byzantine."

"I swear it," cried Totila, enthusiastically pressing Valerius's hand,
"by the genius of Valeria I swear it!"

"Thanks, thanks, my son. Now I can die in peace--greet Valeria--in your
hand is her fate--and that of Italia!"

He laid his head back upon his shield, crossed his arms over his
breast, and expired.

Totila silently laid his hand upon the dead man's heart, and remained
in this position for some time.

A dazzling light suddenly roused him from his sad reverie; it was the
sun, whose golden disk rose gloriously over the summit of the rocks.

Totila stood up, and looked at the rising luminary. The sea glittered
in the bright rays, and a golden light spread over the land.

"By the genius of Valeria!" repeated Totila in a low voice, and
stretched out his hand towards the glorious sun.

Like the dead man he felt strengthened and comforted by his weighty
oath; the sense of having a noble duty to perform elevated his
feelings. He turned back, and ordered that the corpse should be carried
to his ship, that it might be taken and deposited in the tomb of the
Valerians at Neapolis.



                              CHAPTER XI.

During these portentous events the Goths had been by no means idle. But
all measures of vigorous defence were paralysed, and, indeed,
intentionally frustrated, by the cowardly treachery of the King.

Theodahad had soon recovered from his consternation at the declaration
of war on the part of Petros, for he could not and would not part with
the conviction that it had only been made in order to keep up
appearances and save the honour of the imperial government.

He had not again spoken with Petros in private, and the latter must
necessarily have some plausible reason for the appearance of Belisarius
in Italy. No doubt the act of Petros had been a long-determined means
for the accomplishment of the secret plans of the Emperor.

The thought of carrying on a war--of all thoughts the most unbearable
to Theodahad--he very well understood how to keep at a distance, for he
wisely reflected that it takes two to fight.

"If I do not defend myself," he thought, "the attack will soon be over.
Belisarius may come--I will do all in my power to prevent any
resistance being made, for that would only embitter the Emperor against
me. If, on the contrary, the general reports to Byzantium that I have
furthered his success in all possible ways, Justinian will not refuse
to fulfil the old contract, if not wholly, at least in part."

In this sense he acted. He called all the active land and sea forces of
the Goths away from South Italy, where he expected the landing of
Belisarius, and sent them eastwards to Liburnia, Dalmatia, Istria, and
westwards to South Gaul, pretending--supported by the fact that
Belisarius had sent a small detachment of troops to Dalmatia against
Salona, and had exchanged ambassadors with the Frankish King--that the
principal attack of the Byzantines was to be expected by land from
Istria, aided by the allied Franks on the Rhodanus and Padus. The
feigned movements of Belisarius gave colour to this pretext, so that
what is almost incredible took place. The troops of the Goths, their
ships, weapons, and war munition, in great quantities, were led away in
all haste just before the invasion; South Italy, as far as Rome, and
even to Ravenna, was exposed; and all measures of defence were
neglected in the very parts where the first blow was to fall.

The Dravus, Rhodanus, and Padus were crowded with Gothic sails and
arms, while towards Sicily, as we have seen, even the most necessary
guard-ships were wanting.

And the turbulent urgency of the Gothic patriots did not do much good.

The King had got rid of Witichis and Hildebad, by sending them with
troops to Istria and Gaul; and old Hildebrand, who would not quite give
up his belief in the last of the Amelungs, opposed a tough resistance
to the suspicions of Teja.

But the courage of Theodahad was most strengthened by the return of his
Queen.

Shortly after the declaration of war, Witichis had marched with a
Gothic troop before the Castle of Feretri, where Gothelindis had taken
refuge with her Pannonian mercenaries, and had persuaded her to return
voluntarily to Ravenna, assuring her of safety, until her cause should
be formally examined into and decided before the approaching National
Assembly of the people and the army near Rome.

These conditions were agreeable to all; for the Gothic patriots wished,
above everything, to avoid being split into parties at the outbreak of
the war.

And while Earl Witichis, in his great sense of justice, desired that
the right of defence against all accusations should be granted, Teja
also acknowledged that, as the enemy had hurled the terrible accusation
of regicide at the Gothic nation, the national honour could only be
upheld by a strict and formal inquiry, and not by tumultuous popular
justice founded on blind suspicion.

Gothelindis looked forward with confidence to her trial; though the
voice of moral conviction might be against her, she firmly believed
that no sufficient proof of her guilt could be advanced. Had not her
eye alone seen the end of her enemy? And she knew that she would not be
condemned without a full conviction. So she willingly returned to
Ravenna, encouraged the coward heart of her husband, and hoped, when
the day of trial had passed, to find security from all further
molestation in the camp of Belisarius and the court of Byzantium.

The confidence of the royal couple as to the result of the trial was
heightened by the circumstance that the arming of the Franks had given
them a pretext for despatching, besides Witichis and Hildebad, the
dangerous Earl Teja with a third detachment to the north-west of the
peninsula. With him went many thousands of the most zealous adherents
of the National Party, so that the assembly near Rome would not be
overcrowded by adversaries.

And they were ceaselessly employed in gathering together their personal
adherents, as well as the old opponents of Amalaswintha, and the mighty
kindred of the Balthes in all its far-spread branches, in order to
secure friendly voices for the important day.

In this way they had gained composure and confidence. Theodahad had
been persuaded by Gothelindis to appear himself as the advocate of his
wife, in order that such a show of courage and the respect imposed by
his royal person might perhaps, from the very commencement, intimidate
all opponents.

Surrounded by their adherents and a small bodyguard, Theodahad and
Gothelindis left Ravenna and hastened to Rome, where they arrived a few
days before the time appointed for the Assembly, and took up their
quarters in the old imperial palace.

Not immediately before the walls, but in the vicinity of Rome, upon an
open plain called Regeta, between Anaqui and Terracina, was the
Assembly to be held.

Early on the morning of the day on which Theodahad was about to
set forth alone on his journey thither, and while he was taking
leave of Gothelindis, an unexpected and unwelcome visitor was
announced--Cethegus, who had never before made his appearance during
their stay of some days in Rome. He had been fully occupied by the
completion of the fortifications.

As he entered, Gothelindis, struck by his gloomy aspect, cried:

"For God's sake, what evil news do you bring?"

The Prefect only knit his brows, and answered quietly:

"Evil news? For him whom it hurts! I come from a meeting of my friends,
where I first learned what all Rome will soon know. Belisarius has
landed!"

"At last!" exclaimed Theodahad.

And the Queen also could not conceal an expression of triumph.

"Do not rejoice too soon; you may repent it. I do not come to call you
and your friend Petros to account; he who treats with traitors must be
prepared for lies. I only come to tell you that you are now most
certainly lost."

"Lost?"

"We are saved!"

"No, Queen. Belisarius, on landing, published a manifesto. He says that
he comes to punish the murderers of Amalaswintha. A high price and his
favour are assured to those who give you up, alive or dead."

Theodahad grew pale.

"Impossible!" cried Gothelindis.

"And the Goths will soon learn to whose treachery they owe the
unresisted entrance of the enemy into the country. Still more. I am
charged by the city of Rome, as its Prefect, to care for its well-being
in this stormy time. I shall arrest you in the name of Rome, and
deliver you into the hands of Belisarius."

"That you dare not do!" cried Gothelindis, laying her hand upon her
dagger.

"Peace, Gothelindis! Here there is no helpless woman to be murdered in
a bath. But I will let you free--what to me matters your life or
death?--at a moderate price."

"I will grant anything!" stammered Theodahad.

"You will deliver up to me the documents of your contract with
Silverius--be silent! Do not lie! I know that you have treated with him
long and secretly. Once again you have carried on a fine trade with
land and people. I should like to have the bill of sale."

"The sale is now null; the documents without effect. Take them! They
are deposited in the Basilica of St. Martin, in the sarcophagus on the
left of the crypt."

Theodahad's terror proved that he spoke the truth.

"It is well," said Cethegus. "All the exits of the palace are guarded
by my legionaries. I will first get the documents. If I find them in
the stated place, I shall give orders to let you pass. If you then wish
to fly, go to the Porta Marcus Aurelius, and name my name to the
tribune of the guard, Piso; he will let you depart."

He turned and went out, leaving the pair in a state of helpless alarm.

"What shall we do?" said Gothelindis, more to herself than to her
husband. "Shall we yield or defy them?"

"What shall we do?" repeated Theodahad impatiently. "Defy them? that
means stay here? Nonsense! Away as soon as possible. There is no safety
but in flight!"

"Whither will you fly?"

"First to Ravenna--it is strong! There I will take the royal treasure.
From thence, if it must be, to the Franks. Oh, what a pity that I must
leave all the moneys hidden here--many millions of solidi!"

"Here? Here, too?" asked Gothelindis, her attention suddenly aroused.
"You have treasures hidden in Rome? Where? And are they safe?"

"Ah, far too safe! In the Catacombs! I myself should be hours in
finding them all in those dark labyrinths; and minutes are now death or
life, and life is more than solidis! Follow me, Gothelindis, so that
we may not lose a moment. I hasten to the Porta Marcus Aurelius."

And he left the chamber.
But Gothelindis remained motionless. A thought, a plan had crossed her
mind at his words. She contemplated the possibility of resistance. Her
pride could not endure to renounce the government.

"Gold is power," she said to herself, "and power alone is life."

Her resolution was firmly fixed. She thought of the Cappadocian
mercenaries, whom the avarice of the King had driven from his service;
they still remained in Rome, masterless, waiting to embark.

She heard Theodahad hastily descend the staircase, and call for his
litter.

"Fly, fly! thou miserable coward!" she cried, "I will remain here!"



                              CHAPTER XII.

Splendidly rose the sun out of the sea the next morning. Its beams
glittered upon the shining weapons of many thousand Gothic warriors,
who crowded the wide levels of Regeta.

From all the provinces of the kingdom they had hastened by groups, in
families, often with wife and child, to be present at the great muster
which took place every autumn.

Such an Assembly was at once a splendid feast, and the highest national
solemnity. Originally, in heathen times, its immediate intention had
been the grand feast of sacrifice, which, twice a year, at the winter
and the summer solstice, had united all branches of the nation in
honour of their common gods; to this were added a market and exchange
of goods, exercises of arms, and the review of the army. The Assembly
had the power of the highest jurisdiction, and the final decision as to
peace, war, and political relations with other states.

And even now, in the Christian time, when the King had acquired many a
right which once belonged to the people, the National Assembly
possessed a high solemnity, although its ancient heathen significance
was forgotten.

The remains of the old liberties of the people, which even the powerful
Theodoric had not contested, revived under his weak descendants.

A majority of free Goths had still to pronounce sentence, and to award
punishment, even though the King's Earl conducted the proceedings in
his name, and fulfilled the sentence.

Often already had Germanic nations themselves accused, judged, and
executed their kings, on account of treachery, murder, or other heavy
crimes, before a Free Assembly of the people.

In the proud consciousness that he was his own master, and served none,
not even the King, beyond the limit of freedom, the German went in full
armour to the "Ting," where he felt himself safe and strong in union
with his fellows, and saw the liberties, strength, and honour of
himself and his countrymen represented in living pictures before his
eyes.

To the Assembly of which we now speak, the Goths had been attracted by
peculiarly strong reasons. When the summons to meet at Regeta was
published, the war with Byzantium was expected or already declared; the
nation rejoiced at the coming struggle with their hated enemy, and were
glad to muster their forces beforehand. This time the Assembly was to
be, more than ever, a grand review.

Besides this, most of the Goths in the adjacent places knew that
judgment was to be passed on the murderers of the daughter of
Theodoric, and the great excitement caused by this treacherous act had
also contributed to draw the people to Regeta.

While a portion of those assembled had been received by friends and
relatives in the nearest villages, great numbers had--already some days
before the formal opening of the Assembly--encamped in light tents and
huts upon the wide plain, two hundred and eighty stadii distant from
Rome.

At the earliest dawn of day these groups were already in noisy
movement, and employed the time during which they were yet masters of
the place, in various games and pastimes.

Some swam and bathed in the clear waters of the rapid river Ufen (or
"Decemnovius," thus named because it flowed into the sea at Terracina,
nineteen miles off), which crossed the plain. Others displayed their
skill in leaping over whole rows of outstretched spears, or, almost
naked, in dancing amid brandished swords, while others again--and these
the fleetest-footed--clinging to the manes of their horses, kept step
with their swiftest gallop, and when arrived at the goal, securely
swung themselves upon their unsaddled backs.

"What a pity," cried young Gudila, who was the first to arrive at the
goal in one of these races, and now stroked his yellow locks out of his
eyes, "what a pity that Totila is not present! He is the best rider in
the nation, and has always beaten me. But now, with this horse, I would
try again with him."

"I am glad that he is not here," said Gunthamund, who had arrived
second, "else I had scarcely won the first prize in hurling the lance
yesterday."

"Yes," said Hilderich, a stately young warrior in a jingling suit of
mail, "Totila is clever at the lance. But black Teja throws still
better; he can tell you beforehand which rib he will hit."

"Pshaw!" grumbled Hunibad, an elderly man, who had looked critically at
the performance of the youths, "all that is only play. In bloody
earnest the sword is the only weapon that serves a man at the last,
when death so presses on him from all sides that he has no space for
throwing. And for that I praise Earl Witichis, of Fæsulæ! He is _my_
man! What a breaking of skulls was there in the war with the Gepidæ!
The man cleaved through steel and leather as if it were dry straw! He
is still more valiant than my own duke, Guntharis the Wölfung, in
Florentia. But what do you youngsters know about it?--Look! the first
arrivals are coming down the hill. Up! let us go to meet them!"

And now people came streaming in on all the roads; on foot, on
horseback, and in wagons. A noisy and turbulent crowd filled all the
plain.

On the shores of the river, where stood most of the tents, the horses
were unharnessed, and the wagons pushed together to form a barricade.
Through the lanes of the camp the ever-increasing crowd now streamed.
There friends and acquaintances, who had not met for years, sought and
greeted each other.

It was a gay and chequered scene, for the old Germanic equality had
long since disappeared from the kingdom.

There stood near the aristocratic noble, who had settled in one of
the rich Italian towns, who lived in the palaces of senatorial
families, and had adopted the more luxuriant and polite customs of the
Italians; near the duke or earl from Mediolanum or Ticinum, who wore a
shoulder-belt of purple silk across his richly-gilt armour; near such a
dainty lord towered some rough, gigantic Gothic peasant, who lived in
the thick oak-forests on the Margus in M[oe]sia, or who had fought the
wolf in the forests by the rushing [OE]nus for the ragged skin which he
carried over his bear-like shoulders, and whose harsh-sounding speech
struck strangely on the ear of his half-Romanised companion.

There came strong and war-hardened men from the distant Augusta
Vindelicorum on the Licus, who day and night defended the rotten walls
of that outermost northern fortress of the Gothic kingdom against the
wild Su[=e]vi.

And here were peaceful shepherds from Dacia, who, possessing neither
field nor house, wandered with their flocks from pasture to pasture,
still living in the manner introduced into the West by their ancestors
from Asia a thousand years ago.

There was a rich Goth, who, in Rome or Ravenna, had married the
daughter of some Italian moneychanger, and had soon learned to do
business like his father-in-law, and reckon his profits by thousands.

And here stood a poor Alpine shepherd, who drove his meagre goats on to
the meagre pastures near the noisy Isarcus, and who erected his hut of
planks close to the den of the bear.

So differently had the die been cast for the thousands who were here
met together, since their fathers had followed the call of the great
Theodoric to the West, away from the valleys of the Hæmus.

But still they felt that they were brothers, the sons of one nation;
they spoke the same proud language, they had the same golden locks,
the same snowy skins, the same light and sparkling eyes, and--above
all--the same feeling in their hearts: "We stand as victors on the
ground that our fathers forced from the Roman Empire, and which we will
defend to the death."

Like an immense swarm of bees the masses hummed and buzzed, greeting
each other, seeking old acquaintances and concluding new friendships;
and the chaotic tumult seemed as if it would never end.

But suddenly the peculiar long-drawn tones of the Gothic horn were
heard from the crown of the hill, and at once the storm of the thousand
voices was laid.

All eyes were eagerly turned in the direction of the hill, from which a
procession of venerable men now approached.

It was formed of half a hundred men in white and flowing mantles, their
heads crowned with ivy, carrying white staffs and ancient stone axes.
They were the sajones or soldiers of the tribunal, whose office it was
to carry out the ceremonial forms of opening, warding, and closing the
"Ting."

Arrived on the plain, they greeted with a triple long-drawn flourish
the assembly of free warriors; who, after a solemn silence, answered
with the clash and clang of their arms.

The ban-officers shortly began their work.

They divided to the right and left, and enclosed the whole wide field
with red woollen cords, which they wound round hazel staffs fixed into
the earth at every twenty steps; accompanying this action with the
repetition of ancient songs and sayings.

Exactly opposite the rising and setting of the sun, the woollen cords
were raised over the shafts of tall lances, so that they formed the two
gates of the now completely enclosed "Ting-place;" and these entrances
were guarded by soldiers with drawn swords, in order to keep all
strangers and women at a distance.

When all was arranged, the two oldest of the men stepped beneath the
spear-gates and called in a loud voice:

           "According to ancient Gothic custom
            Is the fence erected.
            Now, with God's help,
            The judgment may begin."

After the pause which ensued, there arose a low murmur amongst the
crowd, which gradually grew into a loud, and, at last, almost deafening
uproar of questioning, disputing, and doubting voices.

It had been already remarked, as the procession advanced, that it was
not, as usual, led by the Earl who was accustomed to hold and conduct
the "Ting" in the name and ban of the King. But it had been expected
that this representative of the King would make his appearance during
the ceremony of enclosing the place. When, therefore, this work was
accomplished, and the sentence of the old men called for the
commencement of the tribunal, and still no earl or officer had
appeared, who alone could pronounce the opening speech, the attention
of all present was directed to this deficiency, so difficult to be
supplied.

While everywhere the people asked and sought for the Earl, or some
representative of the King, it was remembered that the King himself had
announced that he would appear in person before his people, to defend
himself and his Queen against the heavy accusation brought against
them.

But when the leaders of the people now sought for the friends and
partisans of the King, to question them concerning him, they discovered
the suspicious fact--which, till now, had been overlooked in the
confusion of general greetings--that not one of the numerous relations,
friends or servants of the royal family, whose duty, privilege, and
interest it was to appear in support of the accused, were present at
the meeting, although they had been seen in numbers, a few days ago, in
the streets and neighbourhood of Rome.

This circumstance excited surprise and suspicion; and for some time it
seemed as if, in consequence of the tumult caused by this singular fact
and the absence of the Earl, the formal commencement of the whole
proceedings would be rendered impossible.

Many speakers had already tried in vain to gain a hearing.

All at once, from the middle of the crowd, a sound was heard, similar
to the battle-cry of some fearful monster, which drowned all other
noises.

All eyes were turned in the direction whence the sound proceeded, and
in the middle of the place, leaning against a lofty ilex-tree, was seen
the tall form of a man, who shouted the Gothic war-cry into the hollow
of his bronze shield, which he held before his mouth.

As the shield dropped, it discovered the powerful face of old
Hildebrand, whose eyes seemed to flash fire.

Enthusiastic applause greeted the appearance of the old and well-known
master-at-arms of the great Theodoric, who, like his master, had, by
means of song and proverb, become a mythic figure amongst the Goths
while still living.

As the applause died away the old man commenced:

"Good Goths! my brave brothers! It troubles and surprises you that you
see no Earl, and no representative of the man who wears your crown. Do
not let it disturb you! If the King thinks thereby to interrupt this
meeting, he is mistaken. I still remember old times, and I tell you,
the people can judge what is right without the King, and hold the
tribunal without the King's Earl. You are all grown up amongst new
manners and customs, but there stands old Haduswinth, scarcely a few
winters younger than myself; he will bear me witness that power is with
the people alone; the Gothic nation is free!"

"Yes! we are free!" cried a thousand voices.

"If the King does not send his Earl, we will choose our 'Ting-Earl'
ourselves," cried the grey-haired Haduswinth; "right and justice
existed before King and Earl! And who knows the old customs of the
nation better than Hildebrand, son of Hilding? Hildebrand shall be our
Ting-Earl!"

"Yes!" was echoed on all sides; "Hildebrand shall be our Ting-Earl!"

"You have chosen me," now said Hildebrand, "and I count myself as well
elected as if King Theodahad had given me a warrant in letter and
parchment. And my ancestors for centuries have often held tribunals for
the Goths. Come, sajones, help me to open the Assembly."

In front of the oak there still lay the ruins of an ancient fane of the
wood-god Picus; the sajones cleared the place, piled up the broadest
stones, and leaned two square slabs to the right and left against the
trunks of the oak, so that a stately seat of justice was thus formed.
And so before the altar of the old Italic sylvan god, the Gothic Earl
held a tribunal.

Other sajones threw a wide blue woollen mantle with a broad white
collar over Hildebrand's shoulders, and gave him an ashen staff, curved
at the top. At his left hand, on the branches of the oak, they hung a
shining shield of burnished steel, and then placed themselves in two
groups on his right and on his left. The old man struck the shield with
his staff till it rung loudly. Then he seated himself with his face to
the east and began:

"I enjoin silence, ban, and peace! I enjoin right and forbid wrong,
quick anger, biting words, ready blows, and everything which can offend
the peace of the Ting. And I ask: is it the year and day, the time and
hour, the place and spot in which to hold a free tribunal of Gothic
men?"

The Goths who stood the nearest stepped forward and answered in chorus:

"Here is the right place, under the wide sky, under the rustling oak;
now is the right time, with a climbing sun, to hold a free tribunal of
Gothic men on the sword-won soil of our Gothic inheritance."

"We are assembled," continued old Hildebrand, "to decide upon two
cases: an accusation of murder against Gothelindis the Queen, and of
cowardice and negligence, in this time of great danger, against
Theodahad our King. I ask----"

But his speech was interrupted by the loud flourish of horns, which
sounded nearer and nearer from the west.



                             CHAPTER XIII.

The Goths turned in astonishment, and saw a troop of horsemen hurrying
down the hill in the direction of the place of justice.

The sun flashed upon the armed figures with such dazzling brilliancy
that they could not be recognised, although they approached rapidly.

But old Hildebrand rose up in his elevated seat, shaded his eagle eyes
with his hand, and at once exclaimed:

"Those are Gothic weapons! The waving banner bears the figure of the
scales: that is the crest of Earl Witichis! and there he is himself at
the head of the troop! and the tall figure on his left is the sturdy
Hildebad! What brings the generals back? Their troops should be far on
their way to Gaul and Dalmatia."

There ensued an uproar of excited voices. Meanwhile the riders had
reached the place and sprang from their smoking horses. Received with
enthusiasm, the two generals, Witichis and Hildebad, went through the
crowd up to Hildebrand's judgment-seat.

"What?" cried Hildebad, still out of breath; "you sit here and hold a
tribunal as if in time of peace, and the enemy Belisarius has landed!"

"We know it," answered Hildebrand quietly, "and would have held counsel
with the King how best to check him."

"With the King!" laughed Hildebad bitterly.

"He is not here," said Witichis, looking round; "that confirms our
suspicion. We returned because we had cause for grave mistrust. But of
that later. Continue where you were interrupted. Everything according
to right and order! Peace, friend!"

And, pushing the impatient Hildebad back, he modestly placed himself on
the left of the judgment-seat amongst the others.

After all had become still, the old man continued:

"Gothelindis, our Queen, is accused of the murder of Amalaswintha, the
daughter of Theodoric. I ask: are we a tribunal to judge such a cause?"

Old Haduswinth, leaning upon his club, advanced a step and said:

"Red are the cords which enclose this place of execution. The National
Assembly has the right to judge red-handed crime; warm life and cold
death. If it has been ordered otherwise in late times, it has been by
force and not by right. We _are_ a tribunal to judge such a cause."

"Through all the nation," resumed Hildebrand, "a heavy reproach is made
against Gothelindis; in the depths of our hearts we accuse her. But who
will accuse her here, in open assembly, in audible words, of this
murder?"

"I," cried a loud voice, and a handsome young Goth in shining armour
stepped forward, on the right of the judge, laying his hand upon his
heart.

A murmur of approbation ran through the crowd.

"He loves the beautiful Mataswintha!"

"He is the brother of Duke Guntharis of Tuscany, who holds Florentia."

"He is her wooer."

"He comes forward as the avenger of her mother."

"I, Earl Arahad of Asta, the son of Aramuth, of the noble race of the
Wölfungs," continued the young Goth with an engaging blush. "It is
true, I am not akin to the murdered Princess; but the men of her
family, Theodahad foremost, her cousin and her King, do not fulfil
their duty as blood-avengers. Is not Theodahad himself abettor and
hider of the murder? I, then, a free and unblemished Goth of noble
blood, a friend of the late unhappy Princess, complain on behalf of her
daughter, Mataswintha. I appeal against murder! I appeal against
blood!"

And, amidst the loud applause of the Assembly, the stately youth drew
his sword and laid it straight before him upon the seat of justice.

"And thy proofs? Speak!"

"Hold, Ting-Earl," cried a grave voice, and Witichis stepped forward
opposite to the complainant. "Art thou so old, and knowest so well what
is just, Master Hildebrand, and allowest thyself to be carried away by
the pressure of the multitude? Must I remind thee, I, the younger man,
of the first law of all justice? I hear the complainant, but not the
accused."

"No woman may enter the Ting of the Goths," said Hildebrand quietly.

"I know it; but where is Theodahad, her husband and defender?"

"He has not appeared."

"Is he invited?"

"He is invited, upon my oath and that of these messengers," cried
Arahad. "Step forth, sajones!"

Two of the officers came forward and touched the judgment-seat with
their staffs.

"Well," continued Witichis, "it shall never be said that a woman was
judged by the people of the Goths unheard and undefended. However she
may be hated, she has a right to be heard and protected. I will be her
defender and pleader."

And he went towards the youthful complainant, likewise drawing his
sword.

A pause of respectful admiration followed.

"So thou deniest the deed?"

"I say it is not proven."

"Prove it!" said the judge, turning to Arahad.

The latter, unprepared for a formal proceedings and not ready to cope
with an opponent of Witichis's weight and steady composure, was
somewhat embarrassed.

"Prove?" he cried impatiently. "What need of proof? Thou, I, all the
Goths know that Gothelindis hated the Princess long and bitterly. The
Princess disappears from Ravenna; at the same time her murderess also.
The victim is discovered in a house belonging to Gothelindis--dead; and
the murderess escapes to a fortified castle. What need, then, of
proof?"

And he looked with impatience at the Goths near him.

"And on this argument thou wilt accuse the Queen of murder before the
open Ting?" asked Witichis quietly. "Truly may the day be far distant
when a verdict is founded upon such evidence! Justice, my men, is light
and air. Woe, woe to the nation which makes its hatred its justice! I
myself hate this woman and her husband; but where I hate I am doubly
strict."

He said this in so simple and noble a manner, that the hearts of all
present were touched.

"Where are the proofs!" now asked Hildebrand. "Hast thou a palpable act?
Hast thou a visible appearance? Hast thou an important word? Hast thou
a true oath? Dost thou claim the oath of innocence from the accused?"

"Proof!" again repeated Arahad angrily. "I have none but the conviction
within my heart!"

"Then," said Hildebrand----

But at this moment a soldier made his way to him from the gate, and
said:

"Romans stand at the entrance. They beg for a hearing. They say they
know all about the death of the Princess."

"I demand that they be heard!" cried Arahad eagerly. "Not as
complainants, but as witnesses of the complainant."

Hildebrand made a sign, and the soldier hastened to bring up the Romans
through the curious throng.

Foremost came a man, bent with years, wearing a hair shirt, and a rope
tied round his loins; the cowl of his mantle hid his features. Two men
in the habit of slaves followed. Questioning looks were fixed upon the
old man, whose bearing, in spite of simplicity and even poverty, was
full of dignity and nobility.

When he reached Hildebrand's seat, Arahad looked closely into his face,
and started back in surprise.

"Who is it," asked the judge, "whom thou callest as a witness to thy
words? An unknown stranger?"

"No," cried Arahad, and threw back the old man's mantle. "A man whom
you all know and honour--Marcus Aurelius Cassiodorus."

A cry of general surprise arose from the Ting-place.

"Such was my name," said the witness, "during the time of my worldly
existence; now only Brother Marcus."

An expression of holy resignation beamed from his features.

"Well, Brother Marcus," responded Hildebrand, "what hast thou to tell
us of Amalaswintha's death? Tell the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth."

"I will. Know, first, that it is not the striving after human requital
which brings me here. I do not come to avenge the murder. 'Vengeance is
mine; I will repay,' saith the Lord. No; I am here to fulfil the last
wish of the unhappy woman, the daughter of my great King."

He took a roll of papyrus out of his dress.

"Shortly before her flight from Ravenna, Amalaswintha directed these
lines to me, which I have to communicate to you as her legacy to the
nation of the Goths. These are her words:

"'The thanks of a contrite heart for thy friendship. Still more than
the hope of safety, I am comforted by the feeling that I have not lost
thy attachment. Yes, I will hasten to thy villa in the Lake of Bolsena.
Does not the road lead thence to Rome, to Regeta, where I will confess
before my Goths, and atone for my crime? I will die, if it must be; but
not by the hands of my enemies. No; by the verdict of my people, whom
I, blind fool, have ruined! I have deserved death, not only for the
murder of the three dukes--who, let it be known to all, died through
me--but still more for the madness with which I repulsed my people for
the sake of Byzantium. If I reach Regeta alive, I will warn my people
with my last breath, and cry: Fear Byzantium! Justinian is false as
hell, and there can be no peace between him and us! But I will warn
them also of inner enemies. King Theodahad plots treason; he has sold
Italy and the Gothic crown to the ambassador of Byzantium; he has done
I refused to do. Be cautious, strong, and united! Would that' dying, I
could expiate the crimes committed while living.'"

The people had listened in deep silence to these words, read by
Cassiodorus in a trembling voice, and which seemed to come to them from
the other side of the grave.

When he ceased, compassion and sorrow prolonged this silence.

At last old Hildebrand rose and said:

"She has erred; she has made atonement. Daughter of Theodoric, the
nation of the Goths forgives thy crime, and thanks thee for thy
fidelity."

"So may God forgive her; amen!" said Cassiodorus.

He then continued:

"I never invited her to my villa; I could not do so. Fourteen days
before I had sold all my property to Queen Gothelindis."

"Therefore her enemy," interrupted Arahad, "misusing his name, decoyed
Amalaswintha into that house. Canst thou deny this. Earl Witichis?"

"No," answered he. "But," he continued, turning to Cassiodorus, "hast
thou also proof that the Princess did not die an accidental death
there? that Gothelindis caused her death!"

"Come forth, Syrus, and speak!" said Cassiodorus. "I answer for the
truth of this man."

The slave advanced, bent his head reverently, and said:

"For twenty years I have had the superintendence of the sluices of the
lake and the waterworks of the baths in the villa; none beside me knew
the secret. When Queen Gothelindis bought the estate, all the slaves
and personal servants of Cassiodorus were sent away; I alone remained.
Early one morning, the Princess Amalaswintha landed at the island, and
the Queen soon followed. The latter at once sent for me, said she would
take a bath, and ordered me to give her the keys of all the sluices of
the lake and the pipes of the baths, and to explain to her the whole
plan of the works. I obeyed; gave her the keys and the plan drawn upon
parchment, but warned her seriously not to open all the sluices, nor to
let all the pipes play, for it might cost her her life. But she angrily
rebuked me, and I heard that she ordered her slave to fill the kettles,
not with warm, but with hot water. I went away; but, anxious for her
safety, I remained in the vicinity of the baths. After some time, I
heard, by the violent roaring and rushing, that notwithstanding, and in
spite of, my advice, the Queen had let in the whole water of the lake.
At the same time I heard the steaming water rise hissing through all
the pipes in the walls; and, as it seemed to me, I heard, dulled by the
marble walls, fearful cries for help. I hurried to the outer gallery of
the baths to save the Queen. But what was my surprise when, at the
central point of the works, at the Medusa's head, I saw the Queen, whom
I thought in danger of death in the bath, standing quietly outside,
completely clothed. She pressed the springs, and exchanged angry words
with some one who was calling for help within. Horrified, and partly
guessing what was going forward, I crept away, happily unobserved."

"What, coward?" cried Witichis, "thou couldst guess what was passing
and creep away!"

"I am only a slave, sir, no hero, and if the Queen had noticed me, I
should certainly not be standing here to bear witness against her.
Shortly afterwards a report was spread that the Princess Amalaswintha
was drowned in the bath."

Loud murmurs and angry cries rang through the assembled crowd.

Arahad cried triumphantly: "Now, Earl Witichis, wilt thou still defend
her?"

"No," answered Witichis, and sheathed his sword, "I defend no
murderess! My office is at an end."

With this he went over from the left to the right, amongst the
accusers.

"You, ye free Goths, have now to find the verdict, and administer
justice," said Hildebrand. "I have only to execute what you pronounce;
so I ask you, ye men of judgment, what think ye of this accusation,
which Earl Arahad, son of Aramuth the Wölfung, has brought against
Gothelindis, the Queen? Speak! is she guilty of murder?"

"Guilty! guilty!" shouted many thousand voices, and not a voice said
"no."

"She is guilty," said the old man, rising. "Speak, complainant, what
punishment dost thou demand for this crime?"

Arahad lifted his sword towards heaven.

"I appealed against murder, I appealed against blood! She shall die the
death!"

And before Hildebrand could put his question to the people, the crowd
was filled with angry emotion, every man's sword flew from its sheath
and flashed in the sun, and every voice shouted, "She shall die the
death!"

The words rolled like a terrible thunder, bearing the people's judgment
over the wide plain till the echo died away in the distance.

"She dies the death," said Hildebrand, "by the axe. Up, soldiers, and
search for her."


"Hold," cried Hildebad, coming forward, "our sentence will be hard to
fulfil, so long as this woman is the wife of our King. Therefore I
demand that the Assembly at once examine into the accusation that we
carry in our hearts against Theodahad, who governs a people of heroes
so unheroically. I will give words to this accusation. Mark well, I
accuse him of treachery, not only of incapability to lead and save us.
I will be silent on the fact that, without his knowledge, his Queen
could scarcely have cooled her hate in Amalaswintha's blood; I will not
speak of the warning which the latter sent to us, in her last words,
against Theodahad's treachery; but is it not true that he deprived the
whole southern portion of the realm of men, weapons, horses, and ships?
that he sent all the forces to the Alps, so that the degenerate Greeks
won Sicily, and entered Italy without a blow? My poor brother, Totila,
stands alone against them, with a mere handful of soldiers. Instead of
defending his rear, the King sent Witichis, Teja and me to the north.
We obeyed with heavy hearts, for we guessed where Belisarius would
land. We advanced slowly, expecting to be recalled at every moment. In
vain. Already there ran a report through the places which we passed
that Sicily was lost, and the Italians, who saw us march to the north,
pulled mocking faces. We had accomplished a few days' march along the
coast, when a letter from my brother Totila reached me: 'Has then, like
the King, the whole nation, and my brother also, forsaken and forgotten
me?' it said. 'Belisarius has taken Sicily by surprise. He has landed
in Italy. The population join him. He presses forward to Neapolis. I
have written four letters to King Theodahad for help. All in vain.
Received not a single sail. Neapolis is in great danger. Save, save
Neapolis and the kingdom!'"

A cry of dismay and anger ran through the listening crowd.

"I wanted," continued Hildebad, "to return immediately with all our
thousands, but Earl Witichis, my commander, would not suffer it. I
could only persuade him to halt the troops, and hasten here with a few
horsemen to warn, to save, to revenge! For I cry for revenge, revenge
upon King Theodahad. It was not only folly and weakness, it was
knavery, to expose the south to the enemy. This letter proves it. My
brother warned him four times in vain. He delivered him and the realm
into the enemy's hands. Woe to us if Neapolis falls, or has already
fallen! Ha! he who is guilty of this shall reign no longer, no longer
live! Tear the crown of the Goths, which he has dishonoured, from his
head! Down with him! Let him die!"

"Down with him! Let him die!" thundered the people, in a mighty echo.

The storm of their fury seemed irresistible, and capable of destroying
whatever opposed it.

Only one man remained quiet and composed in the midst of the turbulent
crowd. It was Earl Witichis. He sprang upon one of the old stones
beneath the oak, and waited till the tumult was somewhat appeased.

Then he lifted his voice, and spoke with the clear simplicity which so
well became him.

"Countrymen! companions! hear me! You are wrong in your sentence. Woe
to us if, in the Gothic nation, by whom, since the days of our
forefathers, right has been ever honoured, hate and force should sit on
the throne of justice! Theodahad is a bad and weak King. He shall no
longer hold the reins of the kingdom alone. Give him a guardian, as if
to a minor! Depose him if you like; but you may not demand his death,
his blood! Where is the proof of his treachery? or that Totila's
message reached him? See, you are silent! Be wary of injustice! It
destroys nations!"

As he stood on his elevated place in the full blaze of the sun, he
looked great and noble, full of power and dignity. The eyes of the
multitude rested with admiration upon him who seemed so superior to
them all in nobility, temperance, and clear-sighted composure. A solemn
pause followed.

Before Hildebad and the people could find an answer to the man who
seemed to be Justice personified, the general attention was drawn away
to the thick forest which bounded the view to the south, and which
suddenly seemed to become alive.



                              CHAPTER XIV.

For the quick trampling of approaching horses and the jingling of
armour was heard in the wood, and soon a little group of horsemen
appeared issuing from under the trees, and far in front galloped a man
on a coal-black charger, which sped on as if rivalling the rushing of
the wind.

The long black locks of the rider waved in the air, as well as the
thick black mane which formed the crest of his helmet. Bending
forwards, he urged his foaming horse to greater speed, and as he
reached the southern entrance to the Ting, sprang from his saddle with
a clash.

All gave way as they met the furious glance of his eye. His handsome
face was ghastly pale.

He rushed up the incline, sprang upon a stone near Witichis, held on
high a roll of parchment, cried with a last effort, "Treachery!
treachery!" and fell prone, as if struck by lightning.

Witichis and Hildebad ran to him; they had barely recognised their
friend.

"Teja! Teja!" they cried, "what has happened? Speak!"

"Speak," repeated Witichis once more, "it concerns the kingdom!"

At this word the steel-clad man raised himself with a superhuman
effort, looked about him for a moment, and then said in a hollow voice:

"We are betrayed, Goths! betrayed by our King! Six days ago I received
orders to go to Istria, not to Neapolis, as I had begged. I felt
suspicious, but I obeyed, and embarked with my thousands. A violent
storm drove numerous small vessels towards us from the west. Amongst
them was the _Mercurius_, the swift-sailing post-boat of Theodahad. I
knew the vessel well; she once belonged to my father. As soon as she
caught sight of our ships, she tried to evade us. I, mistrustful,
chased her and overtook her. Her captain carried a letter to Byzantium,
in the handwriting of the King. 'You will be content with me, great
general,' it said, 'all the Gothic forces are at this moment on the
north-east of Rome; you can land without danger. I have destroyed four
letters from the Count of the Harbour of Neapolis, and thrown his
messengers into a dungeon. In requital, I expect that you will
punctually fulfil our contract, and shortly pay me the price fixed.'"

Teja let the letter fall; his voice died away.

The people uttered deep groans of rage.

"I at once turned and landed, and have galloped here for three days and
nights without pause. I can no more."

And, staggering, he sank into the arms of Witichis.

Then old Hildebrand sprang upon the highest stone of his seat, so that
he towered above the crowd. He tore a lance, which bore a small marble
bust of the King upon its cross-stick, out of the hands of the bearer,
and held it aloft in his left hand. In his right he raised his
stone-axe.

"Sold!" he cried. "He has sold his people for yellow gold! Down with
him! Down, down!"

And with a stroke of his axe he shattered the bust.

This action was the first thunder-clap that unchained the brooding
tempest. Only to be compared to the strife of the elements was the wild
storm which now arose amongst the multitude.

"Down with him! down with Theodahad!" was repeated a thousand times,
accompanied by the deafening clash of arms.

Amidst this tumult the old master-at-arms again lifted up his metallic
voice, silence once more ensued, and he said solemnly:

"Hear it, God in heaven, and men on earth: all-seeing sun and blowing
wind, hear it! Whereas King Theodahad, the son of Theodis, has betrayed
people and kingdom to the enemy; the nation of the Goths, free and full
of ancient fame and born to bear arms, depose him from the throne. We
deprive thee, Theodahad, of the golden crown and of the kingdom; of
Gothic right and of life. And we do this not wrongly, but rightly. For
under all our kings we have been ever free, and we would rather want
kings than want freedom. No king stands so high, that he may not be
judged by his people for murder, treachery, and perjury. So I deprive
thee of crown, kingdom, right, and life. Outlawed shalt thou be,
contemned, dishonoured. As far as Christians pray in their churches,
and heathens sacrifice on their altars; as far as fire burns and earth
grows green; as far as the falcon can fly a whole day when the wind
supports his wings; as far as ships sail and shields shine; as far as
heaven spreads its vault and the world extends; house and hall, and the
companionship of good people, and all dwelling shall be denied thee,
except hell alone. Thy inheritance I divide amongst the Gothic people.
Thy flesh and blood I give to the ravens of the air. And whoever
findeth thee, in hall or court, in a house or on the high-road, shall
slay thee unpunished, and shall be thanked for his deed by the good
Goths, and blessed by God. I ask you, men of justice, shall it be
thus?"

"It shall be thus!" answered the crowd, and struck their swords upon
their shields.

Hildebrand had scarcely descended from the stone, when old Haduswinth
took his place, threw back his shaggy bear-skin, and spoke:

"We are rid of the perjured king! He will meet with an avenger. But
now, true men, we must choose another king. For we have never been
without one. As far back as legend and story reach, our forefathers
have lifted a king upon the shield, the living symbol of the power,
glory, and fortune of the good Goths. So long as Goths exist, they will
have kings; and as long as a king can be found, the nation will endure.
And now it is more than ever necessary that we should have a head, a
leader. The race of the Amelungs rose like the sun in glory--Theodoric,
its brightest star, shone for a long time; but this sun has been
shamefully extinguished in Theodahad. Up! people of the Goths, ye are
free! Freely choose a rightful king, who will lead you to victory and
glory! The throne is vacant. Goths, I call upon you to choose a king!"

"Let us choose a king!" was the answer, in a solemn and mighty chorus.

Then Witichis mounted the Ting-seat, took off his helmet, and raised
his right hand.

"Thou, God, who rulest the stars, knowest that we are not moved by
unwise delight in disobedience, or by wantonness. We use the sacred
right of necessity. We honour the right of royalty, the glory which
beams from the crown; but this glory is dimmed. And in the great need
of the nation, we exercise a people's highest right. Heralds shall go
forth to all the peoples of the earth, and announce that, not because
we despise, but because we honour, the crown, have we acted thus. But,
for God's sake, no disputes, no quarrels now; now, when the enemy is in
the land! Therefore let us first solemnly swear, that he who has
the majority, were it only of _one_ voice, we will all honour as our
king--him and no other. I swear it--swear with me."

"We swear!" cried the Goths,

But young Arahad did not join in the oath. Ambition and love flamed in
his heart. He remembered that after the fall of the Balthes and the
Amelungs, his house was the oldest in the nation. He hoped to win
Mataswintha's hand, if he could offer her a crown; and scarcely had the
voices of the people died away, than he advanced and cried:

"Whom shall we choose, Goths? Reflect well! Above all, it is clear, we
need a man with a young and powerful arm to lead us against the enemy.
But that alone is not sufficient. Why did our ancestors elevate the
Amelungs? Because they were the noblest and most ancient race,
descended from the gods. The first star is extinguished; remember the
second, remember the Balthes!"

"Now there lived only one male descendant of that family, a not yet
adult grandchild of Duke Pitza--for Alaric, the brother of the Dukes
Thulun and Ibba, had not been heard of for years. Arahad was confident
that this boy would not be chosen, and that then the people would think
of the third star of nobility. But he erred. Old Haduswinth came
forward angrily and exclaimed:

"Nobility and race! Are we serfs or freemen? By the Thunderer! shall we
count ancestors when Belidarius is in the land? I will tell thee, boy,
what a king needs. A brave arm, it is true, but not that alone. The
King shall be a rock of justice, a bulwark of peace, not only a leader
in the battle. The King shall have an ever-quiet and ever-clear mind,
as clear as the blue sky; and, like stars, just thoughts shall rise and
set therein. The King shall have an ever-equal power, but still more an
ever-equal measure; he shall never lose and forget himself in love or
hate, as we may, who stand below in the crowd. He shall not only be
mild to friends, but just to enemies. He, in whose heart serenity is
paired with bold courage, and true moderation with true strength--that
man, Arahad, is kingly, even though the humblest peasant had begotten
him."

Loud applause followed the words of the old man, and Arahad fell back
abashed. But Haduswinth continued:

"Good Goths, I think we have such a man! I will not name him: you shall
name him to me. I came here from the distant Alps of our boundary,
towards the Karathans, where the wild Turbidus rushes foaming down the
rocks. There I have lived for more than the usual days of man, free,
proud and lonely. I heard little of the acts of men, even of the great
deeds of my own nation, unless a pack-horse laden with salt happened to
stray my way. And yet the warlike frame of _one_ of our heroes
penetrated even to that desolate height. One who never drew his sword
in an unjust cause, and who never sheathed it without victory. His name
I heard again and again when I asked: Who will protect our kingdom when
Theodoric dies? His name I heard in every victory that we gained, and
in every work of peace that was accomplished. I had never seen him. I
longed to see him. To-day I have both seen and heard him. I have looked
into his eyes, that are clear and mild as the sun. I have heard his
words. I heard how he pleaded for right and justice, even for a hated
enemy. I heard how he alone, when blind passion carried us away,
remained serene and quiet and just. Then I thought in my heart: that
man is kingly; strong in war and just in peace; true as steel and pure
as gold. Goths! that man shall be our king. Name the man!"

"Earl Witichis! yes, Witichis! Hail, King Witichis!"

As the unanimous acclamation rang across the plain, a sudden fear fell
upon the modest man, who had eagerly listened to the speech of the old
orator, and only towards the close suspected that he himself was the
man so praised.

And as he heard his name ring in this thousand-voiced shout, his only
feeling was: "No! this cannot, must not be!"

He tore himself away from Teja and Hildebad, who were joyfully pressing
his hands, and sprang forward, shaking his head, and, as if to protect
himself, stretching forth his arm.

"No!" he cried; "no, friends! not that to me! I am a simple soldier, no
king. I am perhaps a good tool, but no master! Choose another, a
worthier!"

And, as if beseeching them, he held out both hands to the people. But
the thundering cry, "Hail, King Witichis!" was the only answer he
received.

And now old Hildebrand advanced, seized his hand, and said in a loud
voice:

"Cease to resist, Witichis! Who was it who first swore to acknowledge,
without hesitation, the man who gained a majority even of one voice?
See, thou hast all voices; and wilt thou refuse!"


But Witichis shook his head.

Then the old man went up to him and whispered:

"What? Must I urge thee more strongly? Must I remind thee of that
midnight oath and bond; to sacrifice all for the well-being of thy
people? I know--I see through thy transparent soul--that the crown is
more a burthen to thee than an honour. I suspect that this crown will
bring thee great and bitter pain, perhaps more pain than joy; and
therefore I ask of thee, that thou accept it."

Witichis was still silent and pressed both hands over his eyes.

This by-play had lasted far too long for the enthusiasm of the people.
They already prepared the broad shield on which to lift him; they
already pressed up the eminence; and, almost impatiently, the cry
sounded anew, "Hail, King Witichis!"

"Think of thy oath! wilt thou keep it or break it!" whispered
Hildebrand.

"Keep it!" said Witichis, and resolutely looked up. He now, without
false shame or vanity, came forward a step and said: "You have chosen
me, O Goths! well, then take me; I will be your king."

At this each man's sword flashed in the light, and a louder cry arose:
"All hail, King Witichis!"

Old Hildebrand now descended from his place and said:

"I leave this high seat, for the place now belongs to our king. Only
once again let me perform the office of the Ting-Earl. If I cannot hang
the purple on thy shoulders, O King, which the Amelungs have worn; nor
reach to thee their golden sceptre--take, at least, my judge's mantle
and the staff of justice for a sceptre; as a sign that thou wert chosen
for thy justice' sake. I cannot press Theodoric's golden circlet, the
old Gothic crown, upon thy brow, then take the first leaves of the oak
which thou resemblest in trustiness and strength."

With these words he broke a tender shoot of the oak and bound it round
Witichis' brow.

"Up, Gothic warriors! fulfil your office with the shield!"

Haduswinth, Teja, and Hildebad took the ancient Ting-shield, lifted the
King, who was now crowned with wreath, staff, and mantle, and raised
him on their shoulders in sight of all the people.

"Behold, O Goths, your King, whom you yourselves have chosen, and swear
allegiance to him!"

And they swore--standing upright, not kneeling=-to true to him till
death.

Witichis sprang from the shield, ascended the Ting-seat and cried:

"As you swear fidelity to me, so do I to you. I will be a mild and just
king; I will do right and prevent wrong. I will remember that you are
free, like me, and not my slaves. And I dedicate my life, my happiness,
all that is mine, to you, to the people of the good Goths! I swear it
by the God of Heaven, and by my throne."

And taking the Ting-shield from the tree, he cried:

"The Ting is over. I dissolve the Assembly."

The sajones at once knocked down the hazel staffs with the cords, and
in disorderly confusion the masses mingled over the wide plain.

The Romans, who, curiously but shyly, had observed from a distance this
custom of a free people, such as Italy had not witnessed for more than
five hundred years, now also mixed freely with the Gothic soldiers, to
whom they sold wine and meat.

Witichis prepared to go with his friends and the leaders of the army to
one of the tents which were erected on the bank of the river.

There a man in Roman costume--as it seemed, a well-to-do
citizen--pressed among his followers, and asked eagerly for Earl Teja,
the son of Tagila.

"I am he. What would you, Roman?" asked Teja, turning.

"Nought, sir, except to deliver this vase to you. See, the seal, the
scorpion, is intact."

"What shall I do with the vase? I buy no such things."

"The vase is yours, sir. It is full of documents and rolls which belong
to you. My guest desired me to give it to you. I beg you, take it."

And he pressed the vase into Teja's hand, and disappeared amid the
crowd.

Teja broke the seal indifferently, and took the documents out.
Indifferently he looked at them.

But suddenly a vivid flush overspread his pale cheeks, his eyes
flashed, and he convulsively bit his lip. The vase fell to the ground
as he rushed up to Witichis, and said, in an almost toneless voice:

"My King! King Witichis, a favour!"

"What is it, Teja? For God's sake, what wilt thou?"

"Leave of absence! for six--three days! I must go!"

"Go? Where?"

"To revenge myself! Read--the devil who accused my parents, who drove
them to desperation, madness, and death--it is he--whom I long since
suspected. Here is his accusation, addressed to the Bishop of
Florentia, in his own handwriting--it is Theodahad!"

"It is, it is Theodahad," said Witichis, looking up from the letter.
"Go, then! But, doubt it not, thou wilt not find him in Rome. He has
certainly fled long since. He has had a great start. Thou canst not
overtake him!"

"I will overtake him, even if he rides on the wings of the
storm-eagle!"

"Thou wilt not find him!"

"I will find him, if I must pluck him from hell's deepest abyss, or
from out of the midst of the angels!"

"He will have fled with a strong escort," warned Witichis.

"I will reach him in the midst of a thousand demons! Hildebad, thy
horse! Farewell, King of the Goths. I go to fulfil the ban!"





                                BOOK IV.

                               WITICHIS.

"And the Goths chose Witichis for their King, a man of humble origin,
but a famous warrior."--_Procopius: Wars of the Goths_, i. 11.




                                PART I.



                               CHAPTER I.

Slowly sank the sun behind the green hills of Fæsulæ, and gilded the
columns in front of the simple country-house of which Rauthgundis was
the mistress.

The Gothic servants and Italian slaves were busy concluding the day's
work.

The stable-man was fetching the young horses from the pasture; two
other servants were bringing a herd of fine cattle home from the fields
to the stable; while the goatherd, with Roman invectives, was driving
forward his _protégés_, which stopped here and there to nibble the
salty saxifrage which grew upon the broken walls of the road.

Other labourers were housing the agricultural implements in the large
yard, and a Roman freedman, a very learned and superior personage, the
upper gardener himself, left, with a contented look, the place where he
practised his blooming and sweet-scented science.

Our little friend Athalwin, with his crown of bright golden hair, was
just issuing from the stables.

"Don't forget, Kakus," he cried, "to throw a rusty nail into the
water-bucket. Wachis spoke of it particularly. Then he need not beat
thee when he comes home."

And he banged the door to.

"Nothing but trouble with these Italian servants," said the little
master, with an air of importance. "Since father went away, and Wachis
joined him in the camp, everything lies upon my shoulders; for mother
is enough for the maids, but the men need a master."

And the little lad marched with great gravity across the yard.

"And they have no proper respect for me," he continued, pouting his
cherry lips and ruffing his white forehead. "How should they? At the
next equinox I shall be fully nine years old, and they still let me go
about with a thing like a kitchen spoon;" and he pulled contemptuously
at the little wooden sword hanging to his belt.

"They ought to give me a hunting-knife, a real weapon. With this I can
do nothing, and I look like nothing!"

Yet he looked very lovely, like an angry Cupid, in his short sleeveless
coat of the finest white linen, which the loving hand of his mother had
spun, sewed, and embroidered with an ornamental red stripe.

"I should like very much to run into the fields and get the wild
flowers for mother which she loves so much, far more than our finest
garden flowers; but I must look round before they shut the doors, for,
'Athalwin,' said father, as he left us, 'take good care of the place,
and protect thy mother. I rely upon thee;' and I shook hands upon it,
so I must keep my word."

So saying, he went across the yard, past the front of the
dwelling-house, looked into all the offices on the left, and was just
about to turn to the back of the square court, when he was attracted by
the loud barking of some young dogs at a noise which was heard behind
the wooden fence which enclosed the whole.

He went towards the corner, and started back in surprise; for on the
fence sat, or rather climbed, a strange figure.

It was a tall, haggard old man in a coarse doublet of rough cloth, such
as was worn by mountain shepherds; instead of a mantle, an immense
undressed wolfskin hung over his shoulders, and in his right hand he
carried a long staff with a steel point, with which he warded off the
dogs, who angrily sprang at the fence.

The boy ran up.

"Stop, thou strange man! What art thou doing at my fence? Wilt get down
at once!"

The old man started, and looked keenly at the handsome boy.

"Down, I say!" repeated the lad.

"Is this the way one greets a tired wanderer at this house!" asked the
intruder.

"Yes, when the tired wanderer climbs over the back fence. Art thou
honest and meanest honestly--in front stands the great yard-gate wide
open; come in there!"

"I know that very well."

And the man prepared to climb down into the courtyard.

"Stop!" cried the boy angrily; "thou shalt not come down there. At him,
Gruffo! At him, Wulfo! And if thou art not afraid of the two young
ones, I will call the old one! Then take care! Hey! Thursa! Thursa!
stop him!"

At this cry an immense bristly grey wolf-hound darted round the corner
of the stable with a furious bark, and was about to spring at the
intruder's throat. But she had scarcely reached the fence, when her
rage was suddenly changed into joy; she ceased to bark, and, wagging
her tail, sprang up to the old man, who now climbed leisurely down.

"Yes, yes, Thursa, faithful bitch, we remember each other," he said.
"Now tell me, little man, what is thy name?"

"I am called Athalwin," answered the boy, retreating shyly; "but
thou--I believe thou hast bewitched the dog--what art thou called?"

"Like thee," said the old man, in a more friendly manner; "I am glad
thou hast my name. But be quiet; I am no robber! Lead me to thy mother,
that I may tell her how bravely thou hast defended thy home."

And so the two adversaries walked peacefully into the house, Thursa
leaping on in front with joyful barks.

The Gothic housewife had changed, with slight alteration, the
Corinthian atrium of this Roman villa, with its rows of pillars on four
sides, into the hall of the Germanic dwelling.

In the absence of her husband it was not wanted for gay hospitality,
and Rauthgundis had brought her maids here from the women's room, to
enjoy the larger space and fresher air.

There sat a long row of Gothic maidens with their noisy spindles;
opposite to them a few Roman women slaves, occupied in finer work.

In the middle of the hall walked Rauthgundis, and let her own
swiftly-turning spindle dance upon the smooth mosaic pavement, at the
same time turning frequently to look at the maids.

Her dark-blue dress of home manufacture was gathered up above one knee,
and puffed out over a belt of steel rings, which, her only ornament,
bore a bunch of keys.

Her auburn hair was combed, back from the brow and temples, and twined
into a simple knot at the back of the head.

There was much simple dignity in her aspect as she paced the room with
grave and examining looks. She went up to one of the youngest of the
maids, who sat lowest in the row, and bent over her.

"Well done, Liuta," she said; "thy thread is smooth, and thou hast not
so often looked up at the door to-day. Certainly," she added with a
smile, "there is not much merit in that, as Wachis cannot enter."

The young girl blushed.

Rauthgundis laid her hand kindly upon her smooth hair.

"I know," she said, "that thou art angry with me in secret, because I
made thee, the betrothed, work all this year an hour longer, morning
and evening, than the other maids. It was cruel, was it not? Well, see!
it was for thine own good. All that thou hast spun this year of my best
flax is thine; I give it thee for thy new household. Then thou wilt not
need to spin next year, the first of thy married life."

The girl took her hand, and looked up gratefully, with tearful eyes.

"And _you_ they call hard and severe!" was all that she could say.

"Mild with the good, severe with the bad, Liuta. All that is under my
care is the property of my husband, and the inheritance of my boy.
Therefore I must be strict."


Just then the old man and Athalwin appeared at the door. The boy wanted
to call out, but the old man held his hand over his mouth, and, for a
while, observed unremarked the actions of Rauthgundis as she examined
the maids' work, praised, scolded, and arranged new tasks.

"Yes," at last said the old man to himself, "she looks very stately,
and seems to be mistress in the house--yet, who knows all!"

And now it was no more possible to hold Athalwin back.

"Mother!" he cried, "a strange man! who has bewitched Thursa, and
climbed over the fence, and wants to come to thee! I cannot understand
it!"

The stately woman turned to the door with dignity, holding her hand
over her eyes, to shade them from the dazzling evening sun, which shone
full into the doorway.

"Why dost thou lead the guest here? Thou knowest that thy father is not
at home. Take him into the men's hall; his place is not here with me."

"But it is, Rauthgundis! Here, with thee, is my place!" cried the old
man, coming forward.

"Father!" cried Rauthgundis, and threw herself into the stranger's
arms.

Puzzled, and not without displeasure, Athalwin looked on at this
meeting.

"So thou art grandfather, who lives up in the northern mountains? God
be with thee, grandfather! But why didst thou not tell me at once? And
why didst thou not come through the gate, like other honest folk?"

The old man held his daughter by both hands, and looked inquiringly
into her eyes.

"She looks happy and blooming," he murmured to himself.

Rauthgundis composed herself. She cast a quick look round the hall.

All the spindles had ceased whirling--except Liuta's--all eyes were
curiously fixed upon the old man.

"Will you spin directly, curious girls!" cried Rauthgundis reprovingly.
"Thou, Marcia, hast let the flax fell with thy staring; thou knowest
the custom--thou wilt spin another spoolful. You others can leave your
work. Come, father! Liuta, prepare a tepid bath, and meat and wine----"

"No," said the old man; "the old peasant in the mountains has only the
waterfall for bath and drink. And as to eating--outside the fence, near
the boundary-stone, lies my knapsack; fetch it for me. There I have my
wheaten bread and my sheep's-milk cheese.--What cattle hast thou in the
stall, and horses in the pasture?"

It was his first question.

An hour after--it was already dark, and little Athalwin had gone to
bed, shaking his head over his grandfather--father and daughter
wandered into the open air in the light of the rising moon.

"I have not air enough inside," the old man had said.

They spoke much and earnestly as they walked up and down the court-yard
and garden. Between whiles, the old man put questions about the
household, such as were suggested by the implements or buildings near
him; and in his tone lay no tenderness; only sometimes he secretly
examined the countenance of his child with a loving look.

"Do cease talking about rye and horses," at last said Rauthgundis, "and
tell me how it has gone with thee these long years? And what has at
last brought thee down from the mountains to thy children?"

"How has it gone with me? pretty lonely! lonely! and cold winters! Yes,
it is not so pleasant and warm up there as here in the Italian valley."

He spoke as if in reproach.

"Why did I come down? Well, last year the breeding-bull fell down from
the _Firn-joch_, and so I wanted to buy another here."

Rauthgundis could no longer contain herself; she affectionately
embraced the old man and cried:

"And no bull was to be found nearer than here? Do not lie, father, to
thine own heart and to thine own child. Thou art come because thou
couldst not help it, because thou couldst no more endure thy longing
for thy child!"

The old man stroked her hair.

"How dost thou know that? Well, yes, I wanted to see how it went with
thee, and how _he_ keeps thee--the Gothic Earl!"

"Like the apple of his eye!" cried Rauthgundis joyfully.

"Indeed? Why, then, is he not at home with wife and child in his house
and farm?"

"He serves in the King's army."

"Yes, that is just it! What has he to do with service and a king? But,
tell me, why dost not wear a golden bracelet? A Gothic woman once came
our way from the Italian valleys, five years ago; she had gold a hand
broad. Then I thought, such thy daughter wears. And I was pleased, and
now----"

Rauthgundis smiled.

"Shall I wear gold to please my maids? I only put on ornaments when
Witichis sees me."

"Indeed! May he deserve it! But thou _hast_ golden brooches and rings,
like other Gothic wives down here?"

"More than others--chests full. Witichis brought a great booty from the
wars."

"So thou art quite happy?"

"Quite, father, but not because of the gold bracelets."

"Hast thou nothing to complain of? Only tell me, child! Whatever it may
be, tell it to thy old father, and he will see thee righted."

Rauthgundis stopped short in her walk.

"Father, speak not thus! Thou art wrong to speak so, nor is it right
for me to listen. Cast it off, this unhappy delusion, as if I must
necessarily be unhappy because I came into the valley. I verily believe
this fear alone has brought thee down."

"That alone!" cried the old man, striking his staff upon the ground.
"And thou callest thy father's deepest conviction a delusion! Last
night I saw thee and Witichis in a dream. He banqueted in a gilded
hall, among proud men and lovely women, richly clothed; but thou wert
standing outside the door in a beggar's dress, and wept bitter tears
and called to him. But he said, 'Who is this woman? I know her not!'
And I could no longer rest upon the mountains. Something drew me down;
I felt obliged to come and see if my child was well cared for in the
valley; and I wished to surprise him, therefore I would not enter thy
house by the gate."

"Father," said Rauthgundis angrily, "one should not think such things,
even in a dream. Thy mistrust----"

"Mistrust? I trust no one but myself, and the dream told me distinctly
that a misfortune threatens thee! Avoid it! Take thy boy and go back
with me; only for a short time. Believe me, thon wilt quickly love
again the free air up there, where one can overlook all the land."

"I leave my husband? Never!"

"Has he not left thee? The court, and the service of kings, is more to
him than wife and child! Then let him have his will."

"Father," said Rauthgundis, grasping his hand, "not a word more. Didst
thou, then, not love my mother, that thou canst speak so to a wedded
wife? My Witichis is all in all to me; the air and light of life. And
he loves me with all his faithful heart; we are one. And if he thinks
it right to work and act apart from me, then it _is_ right. He serves
the cause of his people, and between me and him there shall not be a
word, not a shadow, not even a father!"

The old man was silent, but his doubts were not removed.

"Why," he re-commenced after a pause, "why does he not take thee with
him, if he has such important affairs at court? Is he ashamed of the
peasant's daughter?" and he struck his staff angrily on the ground.

"Anger blinds thee! Thou art vexed because he has taken me away from
the mountain into the Italian valley, and art equally vexed because he
does not take me to Rome, amongst the Italians!"

"And thou shalt not go there! But he ought to wish it; he ought not to
be able to live without thee. But the King's general is no doubt
ashamed of the peasant's child."

Just then, before Rauthgundis could answer, a horseman galloped up to
the closed gate, before which they happened to be standing.

"Up! open!" he cried, striking the gate-post with his war-club.

"Who is there!" asked the old man cautiously.

"Open! A king's messenger should not be kept waiting so!"

"It is Wachis!" exclaimed Rauthgundis, pushing back the heavy bolt.
"What brings thee back so unexpectedly!"


"It is you who open to me!" cried the faithful man. "Oh, hail! all
hail, Queen of the Goths! Your lord is chosen King. With my own eyes I
saw him lifted upon the shield! He greets you, and calls you and
Athalwin to Rome. In three days you must depart."

In the midst of all her fright and surprise and joy and questioning,
Rauthgundis could not help casting a joyful and proud look at her
father. Then she threw herself upon his neck and wept.

"Well, father," she asked, when she had again composed herself, "what
sayest thou now?"

"What do I say? The misfortune that I foresaw has come! Even to-night
will I return to my mountains!"



                              CHAPTER II.

While the Goths were assembling at Regeta, the powerful army of
Belisarius had invested the hard-pressed city of Neapolis in a wide
semicircle.

Rapid and irresistible as a fire in dry heather, the army of the
Byzantines had advanced from the southernmost point of Italy to the
walls of the Parthenopeian town, meeting with no resistance, for,
thanks to Theodahad's man[oe]uvres, not a thousand Goths were to be
found in all these parts. The short skirmish at the Pass of Jugum was
the only hindrance with which the Greeks had met.

The Roman inhabitants of Bruttia, with its towns, Regium, Vibo and
Squillacium, Tempsa and Croton, Ruscia and Thurii; of Calabria, with
Gallipolis, Tarentum, and Brundusium; of Lucania, with Velia and
Buxentum; of Apulia, with Acheruntia and Canusium, Salernum, Nuceria,
and Campsæ, and many other towns, had received Belisarius with joy,
when, in the name of the Emperor, he promised them deliverance from the
yoke of the heretics and barbarians.

To the Aufidus on the east and the Sarnus on the south-west, Italy was
wrested from the Goths; and the walls of Neapolis was the first
obstacle which broke the rush of the inimical flood which was
threatening to overwhelm all Italy.

The camp of Belisarius was worthy of the name of a splendid spectacle.
In the north, before the Porta Nolana, stood the camp of the "bloody"
Johannes. To his care was entrusted the Via Nolana, and the task of
forcing the way to Rome. There, on the wide levels, in the corn-fields
of the industrious Goths, the Massagetæ and the yellow-skinned Huns
exercised their small rough horses.

Near them were encamped the light-foot of the Persian mercenaries,
dressed in linen coats, and armed with bows and arrows; heavy Armenian
shield-bearers; Macedonians with lances ten feet long, called sarrissi;
and large troops of Thessalian, Thracian and Saracen horsemen, who,
condemned to a hated inactivity during the siege, did their best to
occupy their leisure time by inroads into the neighbouring country.

The camp in the centre, exactly on the east of the city, was occupied
by the main army; Belisarius's large tent of blue Sidonian silk,
with its purple standard, towered in the middle. Here strutted the
body-guard which Belisarius himself had armed and paid, and which only
those who had distinguished themselves by valiant deeds were allowed to
join, gay in richly-gilded breast-plates and greaves, bronze shields,
broad-swords, and halberd-like lances. These men were frequently
promoted to the highest rank.

The kernel of the foot-soldiers was formed by eight thousand Illyrians,
the only worthy troop sent by Greece itself; and here, too, were
encamped, under the command of their native chiefs, the Avari,
Bulgarians, Sarmatians, and even Germans, as well as Herulians and
Gepidæ, whom Belisarius was obliged to enlist at a heavy price, in
order to cover the want of native soldiery. Here, too, were the Italian
emigrants and many deserters.

Finally, the south-western camp, which stretched along the coast, was
commanded by Martinus, who superintended the service of the implements
of siege. Here stood, stored up, the catapults and balistæ, the rams
and slings; here mingled Isaurian allies and the contingents sent by
newly-recovered Africa; Moorish and Numidian horsemen and Libyan
slingers. And almost all the barbaric races of three-quarters of the
globe had here their representatives; Bajuvars from the Donau, Alemanni
from the Rhine, Franks from the Maas, Burgundians from the Rhone, Antæ
from the Dniester, Lazians from the Phasis, and the Abasgi, Siberians,
Lebanthians and Lycaonians from Asia and Africa, all well skilled in
archery.

Out of such heterogeneous materials was the army composed, with which
Justinian hoped to drive away the Gothic barbarians and liberate Italy.

The command of the outposts, always and everywhere, was entrusted to
the body-guard; and the chain of stations extended round the city from
the Porta Capuana almost to the waves of the sea.

Neapolis was badly fortified and weakly garrisoned. Less than a
thousand Goths were there to defend the extensive ramparts against an
army of forty thousand Byzantines and Italians.

Earl Uliaris, the commander of the city, was a brave man, and had sworn
by his beard not to deliver up the fortress. But even he would not have
been long able to withstand the far superior force and generalship of
Belisarius, had not a fortunate circumstance come to his assistance.
This was the premature return of the Grecian fleet to Byzantium. When,
namely, Belisarius, after having rested his troops and re-ordered his
army in Regium, had given the command for a general advance of the land
and sea forces to Neapolis, his navarchus Konon had showed him an order
from the Emperor, till then kept secret, according to which the fleet
was to sail, immediately after landing the troops, to Nicopolis on the
Grecian coast, under the pretext of fetching reinforcements, but in
reality to fetch Prince Germanus, the nephew of Justinian, with his
imperial lancers, to Italy, where he was to observe, control, and, in
case of need, check the victorious steps of Belisarius, and, as
commander-in-chief, to protect the interests of the suspicious Emperor.