THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS


Phantom gold is piled up to excite Covetousness; shadowy banquets
appear to evoke Gluttony. The scene shifts to aid the temptations of
Anger and of Pride....

Anthony finds himself in Alexandria, at the head of a wild army of
monks slaughtering the heretics and the pagans, without mercy for
age or sex. In fantastic obedience to the course of his fancy while
reading the Scriptures a while before, and like an invisible echo of
his evil thoughts, the scene changes again. Alexandria is transformed
into Constantinople.

Anthony finds himself the honoured of the Emperor. He beholds the
vast circus in all its splendour, the ocean of faces, the tumult of
excitement. Simultaneously he beholds his enemies degraded to the
condition of slaves, toiling in the stables of Constantine. He feels
joy in the degradation of the Fathers of Nicæa. Then all is transformed.

It is no longer the splendour of Constantinople he beholds under the
luminosity of a Greek day; but the prodigious palace of Nebuchadnezzar
by night. He beholds the orgies, the luxuries, the abominations;--and
the spirit of Pride enters triumphantly into him as the spirit of
Nebuchadnezzar....

Awaking as from a dream, he finds himself again before his hermitage.
A vast caravan approaches, halts; and the Queen of Sheba descends to
tempt the Saint with the deadliest of all temptations. Her beauty is
enhanced by oriental splendour of adornment; her converse is a song of
withcraft. The Saint remains firm.... The Seven Deadly Sins depart
from him.



THE HERESIARCHS


But now the tempter assumes a subtler form. Under the guise of a former
disciple of Anthony,--Hilarion,--the demon, while pretending to seek
instruction, endeavours to poison the mind of Anthony with hatred of
the fathers of the church. He repeats all the scandals amassed by
ecclesiastical intriguers, all the calumnies created by malice;--he
cites texts only to foment doubt, and quotes the evangels only to
make confusion. Under the pretext of obtaining mental enlightenment
from the wisest of men, he induces Anthony to enter with him into
a spectral basilica, wherein are assembled all the Heresiarchs of
the third century. The hermit is confounded by the multitude of
tenets,--horrified by the blasphemies and abominations of Elkes,
Corpocrates, Valentinus, Manes, Cerdo,--disgusted by the perversions of
the Paternians, Marcosians, Montanists, Serptians,--bewildered by the
apocryphal Gospels of Eve and of Judas, of the Lord, and of Thomas.

And Hilarion grows taller.


THE MARTYRS

Anthony finds himself in the dungeons of a vast amphitheatre, among
Christians condemned to the wild beasts. By this hallucination the
tempter would prove to the Saint that martyrdom is not always suffered
for purest motives. Anthony finds the martyrs possessed by bigotry and
insincerity. He sees many compelled to die against their will; many
who would forswear their faith could it avail them aught. He beholds
heretics die for their heterodoxy more nobly than orthodox believers.

And he finds himself transported to the tombs of the martyrs. He
witnesses the meetings of Christian women at the sepulchres. He beholds
the touching ceremonies of prayer, change into orgies,--lamentations
give place to amorous dalliance.



THE MAGICIANS


Then the Tempter seeks to shake Anthony's faith in the excellence
and evidence of miracles. He assumes the form of a Hindoo Brahmin,
terminating a life of wondrous holiness by self-cremation;--he appears
as Simon Magus and Helen of Tyre,--as Appollonius of Tyans, greatest of
all thaumaturgists, who claims superiority to Christ. All the marvels
related by Philostratus are embodied in the converse of Apollonius and
Damis.



THE GODS


Hilarion reappears taller than ever, growing more gigantic in
proportion to the increasing weakness of the Saint. Standing beside
Anthony he evokes all the deities of the antique world. They defile
before him in a marvellous panorama:--Gods of Egypt and India, Chaldea
and Hellas, Babylon and Ultima Thule,--monstrous and multiform, phallic
and ithyphallic, fantastic or obscene. Some intoxicate by their beauty;
others appall by their foulness. The Buddha recounts the story of his
wondrous life; Venus displays the rounded daintiness of her nudity;
Isis utters awful soliloquy. Lastly the phantom of Jehovah appears, as
the shadow of a god passing away forever.

Suddenly the stature of Hilarion towers to the stars; he assumes the
likeness and luminosity of Lucifer; he announces himself as



SCIENCE


And Anthony is lifted upon mighty wings and borne away beyond the
world, above the solar system, above the starry arch of the Milky Way.
All future discoveries of Astronomy are revealed to him. He is tempted
by the revelation of innumerable worlds,--by the refutation of all
his previous ideas of the nature of the Universe,--by the enigmas of
infinity,--by all the marvels that conflict with faith. Even in the
night of immensity the demon renews the temptation of reason: Anthony
wavers upon the verge of pantheism.



LUST AND DEATH


Anthony abandoned by the spirit of Science comes to himself in the
desert. Then the Tempter returns under a two-fold aspect: as the
Spirit of Lust and the Spirit of Destruction. The latter urges him to
suicide,--the former to indulgence of sense. They inspire him with
strong fancies of palingenesis, of the illusion of death, of the
continuity of life. The pantheistic temptation intensified.



THE MONSTERS


Anthony in reveries meditates upon the monstrous symbols painted upon
the walls of certain ancient temples. Could he know their meaning
he might learn also something of the secret lien between Matter and
Thought. Forthwith a phantasmagoria of monsters commence to pass before
his eyes:--the Sphinx and the Chimera, the Blemmyes and Astomi, the
Cynocephali and all creatures of mythologie creation. He beholds the
fabulous beings of Oriental imagining,--the abnormities described
by Pliny and Herodotus, the fantasticalities to be later adopted by
heraldry,--the grotesqueries of future medieval illumination made
animate;--the goblinries and foulnesses of superstitious fancy,--the
Witches' Sabbath of abominations.



METAMORPHOSIS


The multitude of monsters melts away; the land changes into an Ocean;
the creatures of the briny abysses appear. And the waters in turn
also change; seaweeds are transformed to herbs, forests of coral
give place to forests of trees, polypous life changes to vegetation.
Metals crystallize; frosts effloresce; plants become living things,
inanimate matter takes animate form, monads vibrate, the pantheism of
nature makes itself manifest. Anthony feels a delirious desire to unite
himself with the Spirit of Universal Being....

The vision vanishes. The sun arises. The face of Christ is revealed.
The temptation has passed; Anthony kneels in prayer.

L. H.




THE TEMPTATION OF ST. ANTHONY


_It is in the Thebaid at the summit of a mountain, upon a platform,
rounded off into the form of a demilune, and enclosed by huge stones._

_The Hermit's cabin appears in the background. It is built of mud and
reeds, it is flat-roofed and doorless. A pitcher and a loaf of black
bread can be distinguished within also, in the middle of the apartment
a large book resting on a wooden STELA; while here and there, fragments
of basketwork, two or three mats, a basket, and a knife lie upon the
ground._

_Some ten paces from the hut, there is a long cross planted in the
soil; and, at the other end of the platform, an aged and twisted
palm tree leans over the abyss; for the sides of the mountain are
perpendicular, and the Nile appears to form a lake at the foot of the
cliff._

_The view to right and left is broken by the barrier of rocks. But
on the desert-side, like a vast succession of sandy beaches, immense
undulations of an ashen-blonde color extend one behind the other,
rising higher as they recede; and far in the distance, beyond the
sands, the Libyan chain forms a chalk-colored wall, lightly shaded by
violet mists. On the opposite side the sun is sinking. In the north the
sky is of a pearl-gray tint, while at the zenith purple clouds disposed
like the tufts of a gigantic mane, lengthen themselves against the blue
vault. These streaks of flame take darker tones; the azure spots turn
to a nacreous pallor; the shrubs, the pebbles, the earth, all now seem
hard as bronze; and throughout space there floats a golden dust so fine
as to become confounded with the vibrations of the light._

_Saint Anthony, who has a long beard, long hair, and wears a tunic of
goatskin, is seated on the ground cross-legged, and is occupied in
weaving mats. As soon as the sun disappears, he utters a deep sigh,
and, gazing upon the horizon, exclaims_:--

"Another day! another day gone! Nevertheless formerly I used not to
be so wretched. Before the end of the night I commenced my orisons;
then I descended to the river to get water, and remounted the rugged
pathway with the skin upon my shoulder, singing hymns on the way. Then
I would amuse myself by arranging everything in my hut. I would make my
tools; I tried to make all my mats exactly equal in size, and all my
baskets light; for then my least actions seemed to me duties in nowise
difficult or painful of accomplishment.

"Then at regular hours I ceased working; and when I prayed with my arms
extended, I felt as though a fountain of mercy were pouring from the
height of heaven into my heart. That fountain is now dried up. Why?"

(_He walks up and down slowly, within the circuit of the rocks._)

"All blamed me when I left the house. My mother sank to the ground,
dying; my sister from afar off made signs to me to return; and the
other--wept, Ammonaria, the child whom I used to meet every evening
at the cistern, when she took the oxen to drink. She ran after me. Her
foot rings glittered in the dust; and her tunic, open at the hips,
fluttered loosely in the wind. The aged anchorite who was leading me
away called her vile names. Our two camels galloped forward without
respite; and I have seen none of my people since that day.

"At first, I selected for my dwelling place, the tomb of a Pharaoh. But
an enchantment circulates through all those subterranean palaces, where
the darkness seems to have been thickened by the ancient smoke of the
aromatics. From the depths of Sarcophagi, I heard doleful voices arise,
and call my name; or else, I suddenly beheld the abominable things
painted upon the walls live and move; and I fled away to the shore
of the Red Sea, and took refuge in a ruined citadel. There my only
companions were the scorpions dragging themselves among the stones, and
the eagles continually wheeling above my head, in the blue of heaven.
At night I was torn by claws, bitten by beaks; soft wings brushed
against me; and frightful demons, shrieking in my ears, flung me upon
the ground. Once I was even rescued by the people of a caravan going
to Alexandria; and they took me away with them.

"Then I sought to obtain instruction from the good old man Didymus.
Although blind, none equalled him in the knowledge of the Scriptures.
When the lesson was finished, he used to ask me to give him my arm
to lean upon, that we might walk together. Then I would conduct him
to the Paneum, whence may be seen the Pharos and the open sea. Then
we would return by way of the post, elbowing men of all nations,
even Cimmerians clad in the skins of bears and Gymnosophists of the
Ganges anointed with cow-dung. But there was always some fighting in
the streets--either on account of the Jews refusing to pay taxes, or
of seditious people who wished to drive the Romans from the city.
Moreover, the city is full of heretics--followers of Manes; Valentinus,
Basilides, Arius--all seeking to engross my attention in order to argue
with me and to convince me.

"Their discourses often come back to my memory. Vainly do I seek to
banish them from my mind. They trouble me!

"I took refuge at Colzin, and there lived a life of such penance that
I ceased to fear God. A few men, desirous of becoming anchorites,
gathered about me. I imposed a practical rule of life upon them,
hating, as I did, the extravagance of Gnosus and the assertions of the
philosophers. Messages were sent to me from all parts, and men came
from afar off to visit me.

"Meanwhile the people were torturing the confessors; and the thirst of
martyrdom drew me to Alexandria. The persecution had ceased three days
before I arrived there!

"While returning thence, I was stopped by a great crowd assembled
before the temple of Serapis. They told me it was a last example which
the Governor had resolved to make. In the centre of the portico, under
the sunlight, a naked woman was fettered to a column, and two soldiers
were flogging her with thongs; at every blow her whole body writhed.
She turned round, her mouth open; and over the heads of the crowd,
through the long hair half hiding her face, I thought that I could
recognize Ammonaria....

[Illustration: ... through the long hair half hiding her face,
I thought that I could recognize Ammonaria]

"Nevertheless ... this one was taller ... and beautiful ...
prodigiously beautiful!"

(_He passes his hands over his forehead._)

"No! no! I must not think of it!

"Another time Athanasius summoned me to assist him against the Arians.
The contest was limited to invectives and laughter. But since that
time he has been calumniated, dispossessed of his see, obliged to fly
for safety elsewhere. Where is he now? I do not know! The people give
themselves very little trouble to bring me news. All my disciples have
abandoned me--Hilarion like the rest.

"He was perhaps fifteen years of age when he first came to me and his
intelligence was so remarkable that he asked me questions incessantly.
Then he used to listen to me with a pensive air, and whatever I needed
he brought it to me without a murmur--nimbler than a kid, merry enough
to make even the patriarchs laugh. He was a son to me."

(_The sky is red; the earth completely black. Long drifts of sand
follow the course of the gusts of wind, rising like great shrouds and
falling again. Suddenly against a bright space in the sky a flock of
birds pass, forming a triangular battalion, gleaming like one sheet of
metal, of which the edges alone seem to quiver._

_Anthony watches them._)

"Ah, how I should like to follow them.

"How often also have I enviously gazed upon those long vessels,
whose sails resemble wings--and above all when they were bearing
far away those I had received at my hermitage! What pleasant hours
we passed!--what out-pourings of feeling! No one ever interested me
more than Ammon: he told me of his voyage to Rome, of the Catacombs,
the Coliseum, the piety of illustrious women, and a thousand other
things!--and it grieved me to part with him! Wherefore my obstinacy
in continuing to live such a life as this? I would have done well to
remain with the monks of Nitria, inasmuch as they supplicated me to
do so. They have cells apart, and nevertheless communicate with each
other. On Sundays a trumpet summons them to assemble at the church,
where one may see three scourges hanging up, which serve to punish
delinquents, robbers, and intruders; for their discipline is severe.

"Nevertheless they are not without some enjoyments. The faithful bring
them eggs, fruits, and even instruments with which they can extract
thorns from their feet. There are vineyards about Prisperi; those
dwelling at Pabena have a raft on which they may journey when they go
to seek provisions.

"But I might have served my brethren better as a simple priest. As a
priest one may aid the poor, administer the sacraments, and exercise
authority over families.

"Furthermore, all laics are not necessarily damned, and it only
depended upon my own choice to become--for example--a grammarian, a
philosopher. I would then have had in my chamber a sphere of reeds,
and tablets always ready at hand, young men around me, and a wreath of
laurel suspended above my door, as a sign.

"But there is too much pride in triumphs such as those. A soldier's
life would have been preferable. I was robust and bold: bold enough to
fasten the cables of the military machines--to traverse dark forests,
or to enter, armed and helmeted, into smoking cities.... Neither was
there anything to have prevented me from purchasing with my money the
position of publican at the toll-office of some bridge; and travellers
would have taught me many strange things, and told me strange stories,
the while showing me many curious objects packed up among their
baggage....

"The merchants of Alexandria sail upon the river Canopus on holidays,
and drink wine in the chalices of lotus-flowers, to a music of
tambourines which makes the taverns along the shore tremble! Beyond,
trees, made cone-shaped by pruning, protect the quiet farms against
the wind of the south. The roof of the lofty house leans upon thin
colonettes placed as closely together as the laths of a lattice;
and through their interspaces the master, reclining upon his long
couch, beholds his plains stretching about him--the hunter among the
wheat-fields--the winepress where the vintage is being converted into
wine, the oxen treading out the wheat. His children play upon the floor
around him; his wife bends down to kiss him."

(_Against the grey dimness of the twilight, here and there appear
pointed muzzles, with straight, pointed ears and bright eyes. Anthony
advances toward them. There is a sound of gravel crumbling down; the
animals take flight. It was a troop of jackals._

_One still remains, rising upon his hinder legs, with his body half
arched and head raised in an attitude full of defiance._)

"How pretty he is! I would like to stroke his back gently!"

(_Anthony whistles to coax him to approach. The jackal disappears._)

"Ah! he is off to join the others. What solitude! what weariness!"
(_Laughing bitterly._)

"A happy life this indeed!--bending palm-branches in the fire to make
shepherds' crooks, fashioning baskets, stitching mats together--and
then exchanging these things with the Nomads for bread which breaks
one's teeth! Ah! woe, woe is me! will this never end? Surely death were
preferable! I can endure it no more! Enough! enough!"

(_He stamps his foot upon the ground, and rushes frantically to and fro
among the rocks; then pauses, out of breath, bursts into tears, and
lies down upon the ground, on his side._

_The night is calm; multitudes of stars are palpitating; only the
crackling noise made by the tarantulas is audible._

_The two arms of the cross make a shadow upon the sand; Anthony, who is
weeping, observes it._)

"Am I, then, so weak, O my God! Courage, let me rise from here!"

(_He enters his hut, turns over a pile of cinders, finds a live ember,
lights his torch and fixes it upon the wooden desk, so as to throw a
light upon the great book._)

"Suppose I take the Acts of the Apostles?--yes!--no matter where!"

_'And he saw the heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending, as it
were a great linen sheet let down by the four corners from heaven to
the earth--wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts, and creeping
things of the earth and fowls of the air. And there came a voice to
him: Arise, Peter! Kill and eat!'_[1]

"Then the Lord desired that his apostle should eat of all things?...
while I...."

(_Anthony remains thoughtful, his chin resting against his breast. The
rustling of the pages, agitated by the wind, causes him to lift his
head again; and he reads_:)

_'So the Jews made a great slaughter of their enemies with the sword,
and killed them, repaying according to what they had prepared to do to
them...._[2]

"Then, comes the number of people slain by them--seventy-five thousand.
They had suffered so much! Moreover, their enemies were the enemies of
the true God. And how they must have delighted in avenging themselves
thus by the massacre of idolaters! Doubtless the city must have been
crammed with the dead! There must have been corpses at the thresholds
of the garden gates, upon the stairways, in all the chambers, and piled
up so high that the doors could no longer move upon their hinges!...
But lo! here I am permitting my mind to dwell upon ideas of murder and
of blood!..."

(_He opens the book at another place._)

_'Then King Nabuchodonosor fell on his face, and worshipped
Daniel...._'[3]

"Ah! that was just! The _Most High_ exalts his prophets above Kings;
yet that monarch spent his life in banqueting, perpetually drunk with
pleasure and pride. But God, to punish him, changed him into a beast!
He walked upon four feet!"

(_Anthony begins to laugh; and in extending his arms, involuntarily
disarranges the leaves of the book with the tips of his fingers. His
eyes fell upon this phrase_:--)

_'And Ezechias rejoiced at their coming, and he showed them the house
of his aromatical spices, and the gold and the silver, and divers
precious odours and ointments, and the house of his vessels, and all
that he had in his treasures....'_[4]

"I can imagine that spectacle; they must have beheld precious stones,
diamonds and darics heaped up to the very roof. One who possesses so
vast an accumulation of wealth is no longer like other men. While
handling his riches he knows that he controls the total result of
innumerable human efforts--as it were the life of nations drained by
him and stored up, which he can pour forth at will. It is a commendable
precaution on the part of Kings. Even the _Wisest_ of all did not
neglect it. His navy brought him elephants' teeth and apes.... Where is
that passage?"

(_He turns the leaves over rapidly._)

"Ah! here it is:"

_'And the Queen of Saba, having heard of the fame of Solomon in the
name of the Lord, came to try him with hard questions.'_[5]

"How did she hope to tempt him? The _Devil_ indeed sought to tempt
Jesus! But Jesus triumphed because he was God; and Solomon, perhaps,
owing this knowledge of magic! It is sublime--that science! For the
world--as a philosopher once explained it to me, forms a whole, of
which all parts mutually influence one another, like the organs of one
body. It is science which enables us to know the natural loves and
natural repulsions of all things, and to play upon them?... Therefore,
it is really possible to modify what appears to be the immutable order
of the universe?"

(_Then the two shadows formed behind him by the arms of the cross,
suddenly lengthen and project themselves before him. They assume the
form of two great horns. Anthony cries out_:--)

"Help me! O my God!"

[Illustration: Saint Anthony: Help me, O my God!]

(_The shadows shrink back to their former place._)

"Ah!... it was an illusion ... nothing more. It is needless for me to
torment my mind further! I can do nothing!--absolutely nothing."

(_He sits down and folds his arms._)

"Nevertheless ... it seems to me that I felt the approach of.... But
why should _He_ come? Besides, do I not know all his artifices? I
repulsed the monstrous anchorite who laughingly offered me little
loaves of warm, fresh bread, the centaur who sought to carry me away
upon his croup, and that black child who appeared to me in the midst of
the sands, who was very beautiful, and who told me that he was called
the Spirit of Lust!"

(_Anthony rises and walks rapidly up and down, first to the right, then
to the left._)

"It was by my order that this multitude of holy retreats was
constructed--full of monks all wearing sackcloth of camel's hair
beneath their garments of goatskin, and numerous enough to form an
army. I have cured the sick from afar off; I have cast out demons;
I have passed the river in the midst of crocodiles; the Emperor
Constantine wrote me throe letters; Balacius, who had spat upon mine,
was torn to pieces by his own horses; when I reappeared the people of
Alexandria fought for the pleasure of seeing me, and Athanasius himself
escorted me on the way back. But what works have I not accomplished
Lo! for these thirty years and more I have been dwelling and groaning
unceasingly in the desert! Like Eusebius, I have carried thirty-eight
pounds of bronze upon my loins; like Macarius, I have exposed my body
to the stings of insects; like Pacomus, I have passed fifty-three
nights without closing my eyes; and those who are decapitated, tortured
with red hot pincers, or burned alive, are perhaps less meritorious
than I, seeing that my whole life is but one prolonged martyrdom."
(_Anthony slackens his pace._)

"Assuredly there is no human being in a condition of such unutterable
misery! Charitable hearts are becoming scarcer. I no longer receive
aught from any one. My mantle is worn out. I have no sandals--I have
not even a porringer!--for I have distributed all I possessed to the
poor and to my family, without retaining so much as one obolus. Yet
surely I ought to have a little money to obtain the tools indispensable
to my work? Oh, not much! a very small sum.... I would be very saving
of it....

"The fathers of Nicæa, clad in purple robes, sat like magi, upon
thrones ranged along the walls; and they were entertained at a great
banquet and overwhelmed with honours, especially Paphnutius, because he
is one-eyed and lame, since the persecution of Diocletian! The Emperor
kissed his blind eye several times; what foolishness! Besides, there
were such infamous men members of that Council! A bishop of Scythia,
Theophilus! another of Persia, John! a keeper of beasts, Spiridion!
Alexander was too old. Athanasius ought to have shown more gentleness
towards the Arians, so as to have obtained concessions from them.

"Yet would they have made any? They would not hear me! The one who
spoke against me--a tall young man with a curly beard--uttered the
most captious objections to my argument; and while I was seeking words
to express my views they all stared at me with their wicked faces,
and barked like hyenas. Ah! why cannot I have them all exiled by the
Emperor! or rather have them beaten, crushed, and see them suffer! I
suffer enough myself."

(_He leans against his cabin in a fainting condition._)

"It is because I have fasted too long; my strength is leaving me. If I
could eat--only once more--a piece of meat." (_He half closes his eyes
with languor._)

"Ah! some red flesh--a bunch of grapes to bite into ... curdled milk
that trembles on a plate!...

"But what has come upon me? What is the matter with me? I feel my heart
enlarging like the sea, when it swells before the storm. An unspeakable
feebleness weighs down upon me, and the warm air seems to waft me
the perfume of a woman's hair. No woman has approached this place;
nevertheless?--"

(_He gazes toward the little pathway between the rocks._)

"That is the path by which they come, rocked in their litters by the
black arms of the eunuchs. They descend and joining their hands,
heavy with rings, kneel down before me. They relate to me all their
troubles. The desire of human pleasure tortures them; they would
gladly die; they have seen in their dreams God calling to them ... and
all the while the hems of their robes fall upon my feet. I repel them
from me. 'Ah! no!' they cry, 'not yet! What shall I do?' They gladly
accept any penitence I impose on them. They ask for the hardest of all;
they beg to share mine and to live with me.

"It is now a long time since I have seen any of them! Perhaps some of
them will come! why not? If I could only hear again, all of a sudden,
the tinkling of mule-bells among the mountains. It seems to me...."

(_Anthony clambers upon a rock at the entrance of the pathway, and
leans over, darting his eyes into the darkness._)

"Yes! over there, far off I see a mass moving, like a band of
travellers seeking the way. _She_ is there!... They are making a
mistake." (_Calling._)

"This way! Come! Come!"

(_Echo repeats: Come! Come! he lets his arms fall, stupefied._)

"What shame for me! Alas! poor Anthony."

(_And all of a sudden he hears a whisper:--"Poor Anthony"!_)

"Who is there? Speak!"

(_The wind passing through the intervals between the rocks, makes
modulations; and in those confused sonorities he distinguishes Voices,
as though the air itself were speaking. They are low, insinuating,
hissing._)

_The First_: "Dost thou desire women?"

_The Second_: "Great heaps of money, rather!"

_The Third_: "A glittering sword?" (_and_)

_The Others_: "All the people admire thee! Sleep!"

"Thou shalt slay them all, aye, thou shalt slay them!"

(_At the same moment objects become transformed. At the edge of the
cliff, the old palm tree with its tuft of yellow leaves, changes into
the torso of a woman leaning over the abyss, her long hair waving in
the wind.

Anthony turns toward his cabin; and the stool supporting the great book
whose pages are covered with black letters, seems to him changed into a
bush all covered with nightingales._)

"It must be the torch which is making this strange play of light....
Let us put it out!"

(_He extinguishes it; the obscurity becomes deeper, the darkness
profound._

_And suddenly in the air above there appear and disappear
successively--first, a stretch of water; then the figure of a
prostitute; the corner of a temple, a soldier; a chariot with two white
horses, prancing._

_These images appear suddenly, as in flashes--outlined against the
background of the night, like scarlet paintings executed upon ebony._

_Their motion accelerates. They defile by with vertiginous rapidity.
Sometimes again, they pause and gradually pale and melt away; or else
float off out of sight, to be immediately succeeded by others._

_Anthony closes his eyelids._

_They multiply, surround him, besiege him. An unspeakable fear takes
possession of him; and he feels nothing more of living sensation, save
a burning contraction of the epigastrium. In spite of the tumult in
his brain, he is aware of an enormous silence which separates him from
the world. He tries to speak;--impossible! He feels as though all the
bands of his life were breaking and dissolving;--and, no longer able to
resist, Anthony falls prostrate upon his mat._)


[1] Acts X: 11-13--T.

[2] Esther IX: 5--T.

[3] Daniel II: 46.--T.

[4] Kings XX: 13 (Vulg.).--T.

[5] III Kings X: I (Vulg.).--T.




II


(_Then a great shadow, subtler than any natural shadow, and festooned
by other shadows along its edges, defines itself upon the ground._

_It is the Devil, leaning upon the roof of the hut, and bearing beneath
his wings--like some gigantic bat suckling its little ones--the Seven
Deadly Sins, whose grimacing heads are dimly distinguishable._

_With eyes still closed, Anthony yields to the pleasure of inaction;
and stretches his limbs upon the mat._

_It seems to him quite soft, and yet softer--so that it becomes as if
padded; it rises up; it becomes a bed. The bed becomes a shallop; water
laps against its sides._

_To right and left rise two long tongues of land, overlooking low
cultivated plains, with a sycamore tree here and there. In the distance
there is a tinkling of bells, a sound of drums and of singers. It is a
party going to Canopus to sleep upon the temple of Serapis, in order
to have dreams. Anthony knows this; and impelled by the wind, his boat
glides along between the banks. Papyrus-leaves and the red flowers of
the nymphæa, larger than the body of a man, bend over him. He is lying
at the bottom of the boat; one oar at the stem, drags in the water.
From time to time, a lukewarm wind blows; and the slender reeds rub one
against the other, and rustle. Then the sobbing of the wavelets becomes
indistinct. A heavy drowsiness falls upon him. He dreams that he is a
Solitary of Egypt._

_Then he awakes with a start._)

"Did I dream? It was all so vivid that I can scarcely believe I was
dreaming! My tongue burns. I am thirsty."

(_He enters the cabin, and gropes at random in the dark._)

"The ground is wet; can it have been raining? What can this mean! My
pitcher is broken into atoms! But the goatskin?" (_He finds it._)

"Empty!--completely empty! In order to get down to the river, I should
have to walk for at least three hours; and the night is so dark that I
could not see my way.

"There is a gnawing in my entrails. Where is the bread!"

(_After long searching, he picks up a crust not so large as an egg._)

"What? Have the jackals taken it? Ah! malediction!"

(_And he flings the bread upon the ground with fury._

_No sooner has the action occurred than a table makes its appearance,
covered with all things that are good to eat._

_The byssus cloth, striated like the bandelets of the sphinx, produces
of itself luminous undulations. Upon it are enormous quarters of red
meats; huge fish; birds cooked in their plumage, and quadrupeds in
their skins; fruits with colors and tints almost human in appearance;
while fragments of cooling ice, and flagons of violet crystal reflect
each other's glittering. Anthony notices in the middle of the table
a boar smoking at every pore--with legs doubled up under its belly,
and eyes half closed--and the idea of being able to eat so formidable
an animal greatly delights him. Then many things appear which he has
never seen before--black hashes, jellies, the color of gold, ragouts in
which mushrooms float like nenuphars upon ponds, dishes of whipt cream
light as clouds._

_And the aroma of all this comes to him together with the salt smell of
the ocean, the coolness of mountains, the great perfumes of the woods.
He dilates his nostrils to their fullest extent; his mouth waters; he
thinks to himself that he has enough before him for a year, for ten
years, for his whole life!_

_As he gazes with widely-opened eyes at all these viands, others
appear; they accumulate, forming a pyramid crumbling at all its angles.
The wines begin to flow over--the fish palpitate--the blood seethes in
the dishes--the pulp of the fruit protrudes like amorous lips--and the
table rises as high as his breast, up to his very chin at last--now
bearing only one plate and a single loaf of bread, placed exactly in
front of him._

_He extends his hand to seize the loaf. Other loaves immediately
present themselves to his grasp._)

"For me!... all these! But ..." (_Anthony suddenly draws back._)

"Instead of one which was there, lo! there are many! It must be a
miracle, then, the same as our Lord wrought!

"Yet for what purpose?... Ah! all the rest of these things are equally
incomprehensible! Demon, begone from me! depart! begone!"

(_He kicks the table from him. It disappears._)

"Nothing more?--no!" (_He draws a lung breath._)

"Ah! the temptation was strong! But how well I delivered myself from
it!"

(_He lifts his head, and at the same time stumbles over some sonorous
object._)

"Why! what can that be?" (_Anthony stoops down._)

"How! a cup! Some traveller must have lost it here. There is nothing
extraordinary...."

(_He wets his finger, and rubs._)

"It glitters!--metal! Still, I cannot see very clearly...."

(_He lights his torch, and examines the cup._)

"It is silver, ornamented with ovules about the rim, with a medal at
the bottom of it."

(_He detaches the medal with his nail!_)

"It is a piece of money worth about seven or eight drachmas--not more!
It matters not! even with that I could easily buy myself a sheepskin."

(_A sudden flash of the torch lights up the cup._)

"Impossible! gold? Yes, all gold, solid gold!"

(_A still larger piece of money appears at the bottom. Under it he
perceives several others._)

"Why, this is a sum ... large enough to purchase three oxen ... and a
little field!"

(_The cup is now filled with pieces of gold._)

"What! what!... a hundred slaves, soldiers, a host ... enough to
buy...."

(_The granulations of the rim, detaching themselves form a necklace of
pearls._)

"With such a marvel of jewelry as that, one could win even the wife of
the Emperor!"

(_By a sudden jerk, Anthony makes the necklace slip down over his
wrist. He holds the cup in his left hand, and with his right lifts
up the torch so as to throw the light upon it. As water streams
overflowing from the basin of a fountain, so diamonds, carbuncles, and
sapphires, all mingled with broad pieces of gold bearing the effigies
of Kings, overflow from the cup in never ceasing streams, to form a
glittering hillock upon the sand._)

"What! how! Staters, cycles, dariacs, aryandics; Alexander, Demetrius,
the Ptolemies, Cæsar!--yet not one of them all possessed so much!
Nothing is now impossible! no more suffering for me! how these
gleams dazzle my eyes! Ah! my heart overflows! how delightful it is!
yes--yes!--more yet! never could there be enough! Vainly I might
continually fling it into the sea, there would always be plenty
remaining for me. Why should I lose any of it? I will keep all, and say
nothing to any one about it; I will have a chamber hollowed out for me
in the rock, and lined with plates of bronze, and I will come here from
time to time to feel the gold sinking down under the weight of my heel;
I will plunge my arms into it as into sacks of grain! I will rub my
face with it, I will lie down upon it!"

(_He flings down the torch in order to embrace the glittering heap, and
falls flat upon the ground._

_He rises to his feet. The place is wholly empty._)

"What have I done!

"Had I died during those moments, I should have gone to hell--to
irrevocable damnation."

(_He trembles in every limb._)

"Am I, then, accursed? Ah! no; it is my own fault! I allow myself
to be caught in every snare! No man could be more imbecile, more
infamous! I should like to beat myself, or rather to tear myself out
of my own body! I have restrained myself too long. I feel the want of
vengeance--the necessity of striking, of killing!--as though I had a
pack of wild beasts within me! Would that I could hew my way with an
axe, through the midst of a multitude.... Ah, a poniard!..."

(_He perceives his knife, and rushes to seize it. The knife slips from
his hand; and Anthony remains leaning against the wall of his hut, with
wide-open mouth, motionless, cataleptic._

_Everything about him has disappeared._

_He thinks himself at Alexandria, upon the Paneum--an artificial
mountain in the centre of the city, encircled by a winding stairway._

_Before him lies Lake Mareolis; on his right hand is the sea, on his
left the country; and immediately beneath him a vast confusion of
flat roofs, traversed from north to south and from east to west by
two streets which intercross, and which offer throughout their entire
length the spectacle of files of porticoes with Corinthian columns. The
houses overhanging this double colonnade have windows of stained glass.
Some of them support exteriorly enormous wooden cages, into which the
fresh air rushes from without._

_Monuments of various architecture tower up in close proximity.
Egyptian pylons dominate Greek temples. Obelisks appear like lances
above battlements of red brick. In the middle of public squares there
are figures of Hermes with pointed ears, and of Anubis with the head of
a dog. Anthony can distinguish the mosaic pavements of the courtyards,
and tapestries suspended from the beams of ceilings._

_He beholds at one glance, the two ports (the Great Port and the
Eunostus), both round as circuses, and separated by a mole connecting
Alexandria with the craggy island upon which the Pharos-tower
rises--quadrangular, five hundred cubits high, nine storied, having at
its summit a smoking heap of black coals._

_Small interior ports open into the larger ones. The mole terminates at
each end in a bridge supported upon marble columns planted in the sea.
Sailing vessels pass beneath it, while heavy lighters overladen with
merchandise, thalamegii[1] inlaid with ivory, gondolas covered with
awnings, triremes, biremes, and all sorts of vessels are moving to and
fro, or lie moored at the wharves._

_About the Great Port extends an unbroken array of royal construction:
the palace of the Ptolomies, the Museum, the Posidium, the Cæsareum,
the Timonium where Mark Anthony sought refuge, the Soma which contains
the tomb of Alexander; while at the other extremity of the city, beyond
the Eunostus, the great glass factories, perfume factories, and papyrus
factories may be perceived in a suburban quarter._

_Strolling peddlers, porters, ass-drivers run and jostle together.
Here and there one observes some priest of Isis wearing a panther skin
on his shoulders, a Roman soldier with his bronze helmet, and many
negroes. At the thresholds of the shops women pause, artisans ply their
trades; and the grinding noise of chariot wheels puts to flight the
birds that devour the detritus of the butcher-shops and the morsels of
fish left upon the ground._

_The general outline of the streets seems like a black network flung
upon the white uniformity of the houses. The markets stocked with
herbs make green bouquets in the midst of it; the drying-yards of the
dyers, blotches of color; the golden ornaments of the temple-pediments,
luminous points--all comprised within the oval enclosure of the grey
ramparts, under the vault of the blue heaven, beside the motionless
sea._

_But suddenly the movement of the crowd ceases; all turn their
eyes toward the west, whence enormous whirlwinds of dust are seen
approaching._

_It is the coming of the monks of the Thebaid, all clad in goatskins,
armed with cudgels, roaring a canticle of battle and of faith with the
refrain_:

"Where are they? Where are they?"

_Anthony understands that they are coming to kill the Arians._

_The streets are suddenly emptied--only flying feet are visible._

_The Solitaries are now in the city. Their formidable cudgels, studded
with nails, whirl in the air like suns of steel. The crash of things
broken in the houses is heard. There are intervals of silence. Then
great screams arise._

_From one end of the street to the other there is a continual eddy of
terrified people._

_Many grasp pikes. Sometimes two bands meet, rush into one; and this
mass of men slips upon the pavement--fighting, disjointing, knocking
down. But the men with the long hair always reappear._

_Threads of smoke begin to escape from the corners of edifices! folding
doors burst open. Portions of walls crumble down. Architraves fall._

_Anthony finds all his enemies again, one after the other. He even
recognizes some whom he had altogether forgotten; before killing them
he outrages them. He disembowels--he severs throats--he fells as in
a slaughter house--he hales old men by the beard, crushes children,
smites the wounded. And vengeance is taken upon luxury, those who
do not know how to read tear up hooks; others smash and deface the
statues, paintings, furniture, caskets,--a thousand dainty things
the use of which they do not know, and which simply for that reason
exasperates them. At intervals they pause, out of breath, in the work
of destruction; then they recommence._

_The inhabitants moan in the courtyards where they have sought refuge.
The women raise their tearful eyes and lift their naked arms to heaven.
In hope of moving the Solitaries they embrace their knees; the men cast
them off and fling them down, and the blood gushes to the ceilings,
falls back upon the walls like sheets of rain, streams from the trunks
of decapitated corpses, fills the aqueducts, forms huge red pools upon
the ground._

_Anthony is up to his knees in it. He wades in it; he sucks up the
blood-spray on his lips; he is thrilled with joy as he feels it upon
his limbs, under his hair-tunic which is soaked through with it._

_Night comes. The immense uproar dies away._

_The Solitaries have disappeared._

_Suddenly, upon the outer galleries corresponding to each of the nine
stories of the Pharos, Anthony observes thick black lines forming, like
lines of crows perching. He hurries thither; and soon finds himself at
the summit._

_A huge mirror of brass turned toward the open sea, reflects the forms
of the vessels in the offing._

_Anthony amuses himself by watching them; and while he watches, their
number increases._

_They are grouped together within a gulf which has the form of a
crescent. Upon a promontory in the background, towers a new city of
Roman architecture, with cupolas of stone, conical roofs, gleams of
pink and blue marbles, and a profusion of brazen ornamentation applied
to the volutes of the capitals, to the angles of the cornices, to the
summits of the edifices. A cypress-wood overhangs the city. The line of
the sea is greener, the air colder. The mountains lining the horizon
are capped with snow._

_Anthony is trying to find his way, when a man approaches him, and
says_:

"Come! they are waiting for you."

_He traverses a forum, enters a great court, stoops beneath a low
door; and he arrives before the facade of the palace, decorated
with a group in wax, representing Constantine overcoming a dragon.
There is a porphyry basin, from the centre of which rises a golden
conch-shell full of nuts. His guide tells him that he may take some of
them. He does so. Then he is lost, as it were, in a long succession of
apartments._

_There are mosaics upon the walls representing generals presenting
the Emperor with conquered cities, which they hold out upon the
palms of their hands. And there are columns of basalt everywhere,
trellis-work in silver filigree, ivory chairs, tapestries embroidered
with pearls. The light falls from the vaults above; Anthony still
proceeds. Warm exhalations circulate about him; occasionally he hears
the discreet clapping sound of sandals upon the pavement. Posted in
the anti-chambers are guards, who resemble automata, holding wands of
vermillion upon their shoulders._

[Illustration: And there are columns of basalt everywhere,... The
light falls from the vaults above]

_At last he finds himself in a great hall, with hyacinth-colored
curtains at the further end. They part, and display the Emperor seated
on a throne, clad in a violet tunic, and wearing red shoes striped with
bands of black._

_A diadem of pearls surround his head; his locks are arranged
symmetrically in rouleaux. He has a straight nose, drooping eyelids,
a heavy and cunning physiognomy. At the four corners of the dais
stretched above his head are placed four golden doves; and at the foot
of the throne are two lions in enamel crouching. The doves begin to
sing, the lions to roar. The Emperor rolls his eyes; Anthony advances;
and forthwith, without preamble, they commence to converse about
recent events. In the cities of Antioch, Ephesus, and Alexandria,
the temples have been sacked, and the statues of the gods converted
into pots and cooking utensils; the Emperor laughs heartily about it.
Anthony reproaches him with his tolerance toward the Novations. But the
Emperor becomes vexed. Novations, Arians or Meletians--he is sick of
them all! Nevertheless, he admires the episcopate; for inasmuch as the
Christians maintain bishops, who depend for their position upon five or
six important personages, it is only necessary to gain over the latter,
in order to have all the rest on one's side. Therefore he did not fail
to furnish them with large sums. But he detests the Fathers of the
Council of Nicæa._

"Let us go and see them!"

_Anthony follows him._

_And they find themselves on a terrace, upon the same floor._

_It overlooks a hippodrome thronged with people, and surmounted by
porticoes where other spectators are walking to and fro. From the
centre of the race-course rises a narrow platform of hewn stone,
supporting a little temple of Mercury, the statue of Constantine, and
three serpents of brass twisted into a column; there are three huge
wooden eggs at one end, and at the other a group of seven dolphins with
their tails in the air._

_Behind the imperial pavilion sit the Prefects of the Chambers, the
Counts of the Domestics, and the Patricians--in ranks rising by tiers
to the first story of a church whose windows are thronged with women.
On the right is the tribune of the Blue Faction; on the left, that of
the Green; below, a picket of soldiers is stationed; and on a level
with the arena is a row of Corinthian arches, forming the entrances to
the stables._

_The races are about to commence; the horses are drawn up in line.
Lofty plumes, fastened between their ears, bend to the wind like
saplings; and with every restive bound, they shake their chariots
violently, which are shell-shaped, and conducted by charioteers clad
in a sort of multi-colored cuirass, having sleeves tight at the wrist
and wide in the arms; their legs are bare; their beards, faces and
foreheads are shaven after the manner of the Huns._

_Anthony is at first deafened by the billowy sound of voices. From
the summit of the hippodrome to its lowest tiers, he sees only faces
painted with rouge, garments checkered and variegated with many colors,
flashing jewelry; and the sand of the arena, all white, gleams like a
mirror._

_The Emperor entertains him. He confides to him many matters of high
importance, many secrets; he confesses the assassination of his son
Criopus, and even asks Anthony for advice regarding his health._

_Meanwhile Anthony notices some slaves in the rear portion of the
stables below. They are the Fathers of Nicæa, ragged and abject. The
martyr Paphnutius is brushing the mane of one horse; Theophilus is
washing the legs of another; John is painting the hoofs of a third;
Alexander is collecting dung in a basket._

_Anthony passes through the midst of them. They range themselves on
either side respectfully; they beseech his intercession; they kiss his
hands. The whole assemblage of spectators hoots at them; and he enjoys
the spectacle with immeasurable pleasure. Lo! he is now one of the
grandees of the Court--the Emperor's confidant--the prime minister!
Constantine places his own diadem upon his brows. Anthony allows it to
remain upon his head, thinking this honor quite natural._

_And suddenly in the midst of the darkness a vast hall appears,
illuminated by golden candelabra._

_Candles so lofty that they are half lost in the darkness, stretch away
in huge files beyond the lines of banquet-tables, which seem to extend
to the horizon, where through a luminous haze loom superpositions of
stairways, suites of arcades, colossi, towers, and beyond all a vague
border of palace walls, above which rise the crests of cedars, making
yet blacker masses of blackness against the darkness._

_The guests, crowned with violet wreaths, recline upon very low couches
and are leaning upon their elbows. Along the whole length of this
double line of couches, wine is being poured out from amphoræ, and at
the further end, all alone, coiffed with the tiara and blazing with
carbuncles, King Nebuchadnezzar eats and drinks._

_On his right and left, two bands of priests in pointed caps are
swinging censers. On the pavement below crawl the captive kings whose
hands and feet have been cut off; from time to time he flings them
bones to gnaw. Further off sit his brothers, with bandages across their
eyes, being all blind._

_From the depths of the ergastula arise moans of ceaseless pain. Sweet
slow sounds of a hydraulic organ alternate with choruses of song; and
one feels that all about the palace without extends an immeasurable
city--an ocean of human life whose waves break against the walls. The
slaves run hither and thither carrying dishes. Women walk between the
ranks of guests, offering drinks to all; the baskets groan under their
burthen of loaves; and a dromedary, laden with perforated water-skins:
passes and repasses through the hall, sprinkling and cooling the
pavement with vervain._

_Lion tamers are leading tamed lions about. Dancing girls--their
hair confined in nets--balance themselves and turn upon their hands,
emitting fire through their nostrils; negro boatmen are juggling; naked
children pelt each other with pellets of snow, which burst against the
bright silverware. There is an awful clamor as of a tempest; and a huge
cloud hangs over the banquet--so numerous are the meats and breaths.
Sometimes a flake of fire torn from the great flambeaux by the wind,
traverses the night like a shooting star._

_The king wipes the perfumes from his face with his arm. He eats from
the sacred vessels--then breaks them; and secretly reckons up the
number of his fleets, his armies, and his subjects. By and by, for a
new caprice, he will burn his palace with all its guests. He dreams of
rebuilding the tower of Babel, and dethroning God._

_Anthony, from afar off, reads all these thoughts upon his brow. They
penetrate his own brain, and he becomes Nebuchadnezzar. Immediately he
is cloyed with orgiastic excesses, sated with fury of extermination;
and a great desire comes upon him to wallow in vileness. For the
degradation of that which terrifies men is an outrage inflicted upon
their minds--it affords yet one more way to stupefy them; and as
nothing is viler than a brute, Anthony goes upon the table on all
fours, and bellows like a bull._

_He feels a sudden pain in his hand--a pebble has accidentally wounded
him--and he finds himself once more in front of his cabin._

_The circle of the rocks is empty. The stars are glowing in the sky.
All is hushed._)

"Again have I allowed myself to be deceived! Why these things? They
come from the rebellion of the flesh. Ah! wretch!"

(_He rushes into his cabin, and seizes a bunch of thongs, with metallic
hooks attached to their ends, strips himself to the waist and, lifting
his eyes to heaven exclaims_:)

"Accept my penance, O my God: disdain it not for its feebleness. Render
it sharp, prolonged, excessive! It is time, indeed!--to the work!"

(_He gives himself a vigorous lash--and shrieks._)

"No! no!--without mercy it must be."

(_He recommences._)

"Oh! oh! oh! each lash tears my skin, rends my limbs! It burns me
horribly!"

"Nay!--it is not so very terrible after all!--one becomes accustomed to
it. It even seems to me...."

(_Anthony pauses._)

"Continue, coward! continue! Good! good!--upon the arms, on the back,
on the breast, on the belly--everywhere! Hiss, ye thongs! bite me!
tear me! I would that my blood could spurt to the stars!--let my bones
crack!--let my tendons be laid bare! O for pincers, racks, and melted
lead! The martyrs have endured far worse; have they not, Ammonaria?"

(_The shadow of the Devil's horns reappears._)

"I might have been bound to the column opposite to thine,--face to
face--under thy eyes--answering thy shrieks by my sighs; and our pangs
might have been interblended, our souls intermingled."

(_He lashes himself with fury._)

"What! what! again. Take that!--But how strange a titillation thrills
me! What punishment! what pleasure! I feel as though receiving
invisible kisses; the very marrow of my bones seems to melt. I die...."

_And he sees before him three cavaliers, mounted upon onagers, clad in
robes of green--each holding a lily in his hand, and all resembling
each other in feature._

_Anthony turns round, and beholds three other cavaliers exactly
similar, riding upon similar onagers, and preserving the same attitude._

_He draws back. Then all the onagers advance one pace at the same time,
and rub their noses against him, trying to bite his garment. Voices
shout_:--

"Here! here! this way!"

_And between the clefts of the mountain, appear standards,--camels'
heads with halters of red silk--mules laden with baggage, and women
covered with yellow veils, bestriding piebald horses._

_The panting beasts lie down; the slaves rush to the bales and
packages, motley-striped carpets are unrolled; precious glimmering
things are laid upon the ground._

_A white elephant, caparisoned with a golden net, trots forward,
shaking the tuft of ostrich plumes attached to his head-band._

_Upon his back, perched on cushions of blue wool, with her legs
crossed, her eyes half closed, her comely head sleepily nodding, is a
woman so splendidly clad that she radiates light about her. The crowd
falls prostrate; the elephant bends his knees; and_

THE QUEEN OF SHEBA

_letting herself glide down from his shoulder upon the carpets spread
to receive her, approaches Saint Anthony._

_Her robe of gold brocade, regularly divided by furbelows of pearls,
of jet, and of sapphires, sheaths her figure closely with its
tight-fitting bodice, set off by colored designs representing the
twelve signs of the Zodiac. She wears very high pattens--one of which
is black, and sprinkled with silver stars, with a moon crescent; the
other, which is white, is sprinkled with a spray of gold, with a golden
sun in the middle._

_Her wide sleeves, decorated with emeralds and bird-plumes, leave
exposed her little round bare arms, clasped at the wrist by ebony
bracelets; and her hands, loaded with precious rings, are terminated by
nails so sharply pointed that the ends of her fingers seem almost like
needles._

_A chain of dead gold, passing under her chin, is caught up on either
side of her face, and spirally coiled about her coiffure, whence,
redescending, it grazes her shoulders and is attached upon her bosom
to a diamond scorpion, which protrudes a jewelled tongue between her
breasts. Two immense blond pearls depend heavily from her ears. The
borders of her eyelids are painted black. There is a natural brown spot
upon her left cheek; and she opens her mouth in breathing, as if her
corset inconvenienced her._

_She shakes, as she approaches, a green parasol with an ivory handle,
and silver-gilt bells attached to its rim; twelve little woolly-haired
negro-boys support the long train of her robe, whereof an ape holds the
extremity, which it raises up from time to time. She exclaims_:

"Ah! handsome hermit! handsome hermit!--my heart swoons!

"By dint of stamping upon the ground with impatience, callosities have
formed upon my heel, and I have broken one of my nails. I sent out
shepherds, who remained upon the mountain tops, shading their eyes with
their hands--and hunters who shouted thy name in all the forests--and
spies who travelled along the highways, asking every passer-by:

"'Hast thou seen him?'

"By night I wept, with my face turned to the wall. And at last my tears
made two little holes in the mosaic, like two pools of water among the
rocks;--for I love thee!--oh! how I love thee!"

(_She takes him by the beard._)

"Laugh now, handsome hermit! laugh! I am very joyous, very gay: thou
shalt soon see! I play the lyre; I dance like a bee; and I know a host
of merry tales to tell, each more diverting than the other.

"Thou canst not even imagine how mighty a journey we have made. See!
the onagers upon which the green couriers rode are dead with fatigue!"

(_The onagers are lying motionless upon the ground._)

"For three long moons they never ceased to gallop on with the same
equal pace, holdings flints between their teeth to cut the wind, their
tails ever streaming out behind them, their sinews perpetually strained
to the uttermost, always galloping, galloping. Never can others be
found like them. They were bequeathed me by my paternal grand-father,
the Emperor Saharil, son of Iakhschab, son of Iaarab, son of Kastan.
Ah! if they were still alive, we should harness them to a litter that
they might bear us back speedily to the palace! But ... what ails
thee?--of what art thou dreaming?"

(_She stares at him, examines him closely._)

"Ah, when thou shalt be my husband, I will robe thee, I will perfume
thee, I will depilate thee."

(_Anthony remains motionless, more rigid than a stake, more pallid
than a corpse._)

"Thou hast a sad look--is it because of leaving thy hermitage? Yet I
have left everything for thee--even King Solomon, who, nevertheless,
possesses much wisdom, twenty thousand chariots of war, and a beautiful
beard. I have brought thee my wedding gifts. Choose!"

(_She walks to and fro among the ranks of slaves and the piles of
precious goods._)

"Here is Genezareth balm, incense from Cape Gardefui, labdanum,
cinnamon, and silphium--good to mingle with sauces. In that bale are
Assyrian embroideries, ivory from the Ganges, purple from Elissa;
and that box of snow contains a skin of chalybon, the wine, which
is reserved for the Kings of Assyria, and which is drunk from the
horn of a unicorn. Here are necklaces, brooches, nets for the hair,
parasols, gold powder from Baasa, cassiteria from Tartessus, blue wood
from Pandio, white furs from Issidonia, carbuncles from the Island
Palæsimondus, and toothpicks made of the bristles of the tachas--that
lost animal which is found under the earth. These cushions come from
Emath, and these mantle-fringes from Palmyra. On this Babylonian carpet
there is.... But come hither! come! come!"

(_She pulls Saint Anthony by the sleeve. He resists. She continues_:)

"This thin tissue which crackles under the finger with a sound as of
sparks, is the famous yellow cloth which the merchants of Bactria bring
us. I will have robes made of it for thee, which thou shalt wear in the
house. Unfasten the hooks of that sycamore box, and hand me also the
little ivory casket tied to my elephant's shoulder."

(_They take something round out of a box--something covered with a
cloth--and also bring a little ivory casket covered with carving._)

"Dost thou desire the buckler of Dgian-ben-Dgian, who built the
pyramids?--behold it!--It is formed of seven dragon-skins laid one over
the other, tanned in the bile of parricides, and fastened together by
adamantine screws. Upon one side are represented all the wars that have
taken place since the invention of weapons; and upon the other, all the
wars that will take place until the end of the world. The lightning
itself rebounds from it like a ball of cork. I am going to place it
upon thy arm; and thou wilt carry it during the chase.

"But if thou didst only know what I have in this little box of mine!
Turn it over and over again! try to open it! No one could ever succeed
in doing that. Kiss me! and I will tell thee how to open it."

(_She takes Saint Anthony by both cheeks. He pushes her away at arms'
length._)

"It was one night that King Solomon lost his head. At last we concluded
a bargain. He arose, and stealing out on tiptoe...."

(_She suddenly executes a pirouette._)

"Ah, ah! comely hermit, thou shalt not know it! thou shalt not know!"

(_She shakes her parasol, making all its little bells tinkle._)

"And I possess many other strange things--oh! yes! I have treasures
concealed in winding galleries where one would lose one's way, as
in a forest. I have summer-palaces constructed in trellis-work of
reeds, and winter-palaces all built of black marble. In the midst of
lakes vast as seas, I have islands round as pieces of silver, and all
covered with mother-of-pearl,--islands whose shores make music to
the lapping of tepid waves upon the sand. The slaves of my kitchens
catch birds in my aviaries, and fish in my fishponds. I have engravers
continually seated at their benches to hollow out my likeness in hard
jewel-stones, and panting molders forever casting statues of me, and
perfumers incessantly mingling the sap of rare plants with vinegar,
or preparing cosmetic pastes. I have female dressmakers cutting out
patterns in richest material, goldsmiths cutting and mounting jewels of
price, and careful painters pouring upon my palace wainscoting boiling
resins, which they subsequently cool with fans. I have enough female
attendants to form a harem, eunuchs enough to make an army. I have
armies likewise; I have nations! In the vestibule of my palace I keep a
guard of dwarfs--all bearing ivory trumpets at their backs." (_Anthony
sighs._)

"I have teams of trained gazelles; I have elephant quadrigæ; I have
hundreds of pairs of camels, and mares whose manes are so long that
their hoofs become entangled therein when they gallop, and herds of
cattle with horns so broad that when they go forth to graze the woods
have to be hewn down before them. I have giraffes wandering in my
gardens; they stretch their heads over the edge of my roof, when I take
the air after dinner.

"Seated in a shell drawn over the waters by dolphins, I travel
through the grottoes, listening lo the dropping of the water from the
stalactites. I go down to the land of diamonds, where my friends the
magicians allow me to choose the finest: then I reascend to earth and
return to my home."

(_She utters a sharp whistle; and a great bird, descending from the
sky, alights upon her hair, from which it makes the blue powder fall._

_Its orange-colored plumage seems formed of metallic scales. Its little
head, crested with a silver tuft, has a human face._

_It has four wings, the feet of a vulture, and an immense peacock's
tail which it spreads open like a fan._

_It seizes the Queen's parasol in its beak, reels a moment ere
obtaining its balance; then it erects all its plumes, and remains
motionless._)

"Thanks! my beautiful Simorg-Anka!--thou didst tell me where the loving
one was hiding! Thanks! thanks! my heart's messenger!

"He flies swiftly as Desire! He circles the world in his flight. At eve
he returns; he perches at the foot of my couch and tells me all he has
seen--the seas that have passed far beneath him with all their fishes
and ships, the great void deserts he has contemplated from the heights
of the sky, the harvests that were bowing in the valleys, and the
plants that were growing upon the walls of cities abandoned."

(_She wrings her hands, languorously._)

"Oh! if thou wast willing! if thou wast willing!... I have a pavilion
on a promontory in the middle of an isthmus dividing two oceans. It is
all wain-scoted with sheets of glass, and floored with tortoise shell,
and open to the four winds of heaven. From its height I watch my fleets
come in, and my nations toiling up the mountain-slopes with burthens
upon their shoulders. There would we sleep upon downs softer than
clouds; we would drink cool draughts from fruit-shells, and we would
gaze at the sun through emeralds! Come!" ...

(_Anthony draws back. She approaches him again, and exclaims in a tone
of vexation_:--)

"How? neither the rich, nor the coquettish, nor the amorous woman can
charm thee: is it so? None but a lascivious woman, with a hoarse voice
and lusty person, with fire-colored hair and superabundant flesh? Dost
thou prefer a body cold as the skin of a serpent, or rather great dark
eyes deeper than the mystic caverns?--behold them, my eyes!--look into
them!"

(_Anthony, in spite of him, gazes into her eyes._)

"All the women thou hast ever met--from the leman of the cross-roads,
singing under the light of her lantern, even to the patrician lady
scattering rose-petals abroad from her litter,--all the forms thou hast
ever obtained glimpses of--all the imaginations of thy desire thou hast
only to ask for them! I am not a woman: I am a world! My cloak has only
to fall in order that thou mayest discover a succession of mysteries."
(_Anthony's teeth chatter._)

"Place but thy finger upon my shoulder: it will be as though a stream
of fire shot through all thy veins. The possession of the least part
of me will fill thee with a joy more vehement than the conquest of an
Empire could give thee! Approach thy lips: there is a sweetness in my
kisses as of a fruit dissolving within thy heart. Ah! how thou wilt
lose thyself beneath my long hair, inhale the perfume of my bosom,
madden thyself with the beauty of my limbs: and thus, consumed by the
fire of my eyes, clasped within my arms as in a whirlwind...."

[Illustration: ... there is a sweetness in my kisses as of a fruit
dissolving within thy heart]

(_Anthony makes the sign of the cross._)

"Thou disdainest me! farewell!"

(_She departs, weeping; then, suddenly turning round_:--)

"Art quite sure?--so beautiful a woman...."

(_She laughs, and the ape that bears her train, lifts it up._)

"Thou wilt regret it, my comely hermit! thou wilt yet weep! thou wilt
again feel weary of thy life; but I care not a whit! La! la! la!--oh!
oh! oh!"

(_She takes her departure, hopping upon one foot and covering her face
with her hands._

_All the slaves file off before Saint Anthony--the horses, the
dromedaries, the elephant, the female attendants, the mules (which
have been reloaded), the negro boys, the ape, the green couriers each
holding his broken lily in his hand; and the Queen of Sheba departs,
uttering a convulsive hiccough at intervals, which might be taken
either for a sound of hysterical sobbing, or the half-suppressed
laughter of mockery._)


[1] _Thalamegii_--pleasure-boats having apartments.




III


(_When she has disappeared in the distance, Anthony observes a child
seated upon the threshold of his cabin._)

"It is one of the Queen's servants, no doubt," (_he thinks_).

(_This child is small like a dwarf, and nevertheless squat of build,
like one of the Cabiri; deformed withal, and wretched of aspect. His
prodigiously large head is covered with white hair; and he shivers
under a shabby tunic, all the while clutching a roll of papyrus. The
light of the moon passing through a cloud falls upon him._)

ANTHONY

(_watches him from a distance, and is afraid of him._) "Who art thou?"

THE CHILD (_replies_). "Thy ancient disciple, Hilarion."

ANTHONY. "Thou liest! Hilarion hath been dwelling in Palestine for
many long years."

HILARION. "I have returned! It is really I!"

ANTHONY (_draws near and examines him closely_). "Yet his face was
radiant as the dawn, candid, joyous. This face is the face of one
gloomy and old."

HILARION. "Long and arduous labor hath wearied me!"

ANTHONY. "The voice is also different. It hath an icy tone."

HILARION. "Because I have nourished me with bitter things!"

ANTHONY. "And those white hairs?"

HILARION. "I have endured many woes!"

ANTHONY (_aside_). "Could it be possible?"

HILARION. "I was not so far from thee as thou doest imagine. The hermit
Paul visited thee this year, during the month of Schebar. It is just
twenty days since the Nomads brought thee bread. Thou didst tell a
sailor, the day before yesterday, to send thee three bodkins."

ANTHONY. "He knows all!"

HILARION. "Know further more that I have never left thee. But there are
long periods during which thou hast no knowledge of my presence."

ANTHONY. "How can that be? Yet it is true that my head is so much
troubled--this night especially."

HILARION. "All the Capital Sins came hither. But their wretched snares
can avail nothing against such a Saint as thou."

ANTHONY. "Oh! no!--no! I fall at every moment! Why am I not of those
whose souls are ever intrepid, whose minds are always firm,--for
example, the great Athanasius?"

HILARION. "He was illegally ordained by seven bishops."

ANTHONY. "What matter if his virtue...."

HILARION. "Go to!--a most vainglorious and cruel man, forever involved
in intrigues, and exiled at last as a monopolist."[1]

ANTHONY. "Calumny!"

HILARION. "Thou wilt not deny that he sought to corrupt Eustates, the
treasurer of largesses?"

ANTHONY. "It is affirmed, I acknowledge."

HILARION. "Through vengeance he burned down the house of Arsenius."

ANTHONY. "Alas!"

HILARION. "At the council of Nicæa he said in speaking of Jesus: 'The
man of the Lord.'"

ANTHONY. "Ah! that is a blasphemy!"

HILARION. "So limited in understanding, moreover, that he confesses he
comprehends nothing of the nature of the "Word!"

ANTHONY (_smiling with gratification_). "In sooth his intelligence is
not ... very lofty."

HILARION. "Hypocrite! burying thyself in solitude only in order the
more fully to abandon thyself to the indulgence of thy envious desires!
What if thou dost deprive thyself of meats, of wine, of warmth, of
bath, of slaves, or honours?--dost thou not permit thy imagination to
offer thee banquets, perfumes, women, and the applause of multitudes?
Thy chastity is but a more subtle form of corruption, and thy contempt
of this world is but the impotence of thy hatred against it! Either
this it is that makes such as thyself so lugubrious, or else 'tis
doubt. The possession of truth giveth joy. Was Jesus sad? Did he not
travel in the company of friends, repose beneath the shade of olive
trees, enter the house of the publican, drink many cups of wine, pardon
the sinning woman, and assuage all sorrows? Thou!--thou hast no pity
save for thine own misery! It is like a remorse that gnaws thee, a
savage madness that impels thee to repel the caress of a dog or to
frown upon the smile of a child."

ANTHONY (_bursting into tears_). "Enough! enough! thou dost wound my
heart deeply."

HILARION. "Shake the vermin from thy rags! Rise up from thy filth! Thy
God is not a Moloch who demands human flesh in sacrifice!"

ANTHONY. "Yet suffering is blessed. The cherubim stoop to receive the
blood of confessors."

HILARION. "Admire, then, the Montanists!--they surpass all others."

ANTHONY. "But it is the truth of the doctrine which makes the
martyrdom."

HILARION. "How can martyrdom prove the excellence of the doctrine,
inasmuch as it bears equal witness for error?"

HILARION. "Silence!--thou viper!"

ANTHONY. "Perhaps martyrdom is not so difficult as thou dost imagine!
The exhortations of friends, the pleasure of insulting the people,
the oath one has taken, a certain dizzy excitement, a thousand
circumstances all aid the resolution of the martyrs...."

(_Anthony turns his back upon Hilarion, and moves away from him.
Hilarion follows him._)

" ... Moreover this manner of dying often brings about great disorders.
Dionysius, Cyprian and Gregory fled from it. Peter of Alexandria has
condemned it; and the council of Elvira...."

ANTHONY (_stops his ears_). "I will listen to thee no longer!"

HILARION (_raising his voice_). "Lo! thou fallest again into the
habitual sin, which is sloth! Ignorance is the foam of pride. One says,
forsoth:--'My conviction is formed! wherefore argue further?'--and one
despises the doctors, the philosophers, tradition itself, and even the
text of the law whereof one is ignorant! Dost thou imagine that thou
dost hold all wisdom in the hollow of thy hand?"

ANTHONY. "I hear him still! His loud words fill my brain."

HILARION. "The efforts of others to comprehend God are mightier than
all thy mortifications to move Him. We obtain merit only by our thirst
for truth. Religion alone cannot explain all things; and the solution
of problems ignored by thee can render faith still more invulnerable
and noble. Therefore, for our salvation we must communicate with our
brethren--otherwise the Church, the assembly of the faithful, would
be a meaningless word--and we must listen to all reasoning, despising
nothing, nor any person. The magician Balaam, the poet Aeschylus,
and the Sybil of Cumæ--all foretold the Saviour. Dionysius, the
Alexandrian, received from heaven the command to read all books. Saint
Clement orders us to cultivate Greek letters. Hennas was converted by
the illusion of a woman he had loved...."

ANTHONY. "What an aspect of authority! It seems to me thou art growing
taller...."

(_And, in very truth, the stature of Hilarion is gradually increasing;
and Anthony shuts his eyes, that he may not see him._)

HILARION. "Reassure thyself, good Hermit. Let us seat ourselves there,
upon that great stone, as we used to do in other years, when, at the
first dawn of day, I was wont to salute thee with the appellation,
'Clear star of morning'--and thou wouldst therewith commence to
instruct me. Yet my instruction is not yet completed. The moon gives us
light enough. I am prepared to hear thy words."

(_He has drawn a calamus from his girdle, and seating himself
cross-legged upon the ground, with the papyrus roll still in his hand,
he lifts his face toward Saint Anthony, who sits near him, with head
bowed down._

_After a moment of silence Hilarion continues_:--)

"Is not the word of God confirmed for us by miracles? Nevertheless
the magicians of Pharaoh performed miracles; other imposters can
perform them; one may be thereby deceived. What then is a miracle?
An event which seems to us outside of nature. But do we indeed know
all of Nature's powers; and because a common occurrence causes us no
astonishment, does it therefore follow that we understand it."

ANTHONY. "It matters little! We must believe the Scriptures!"

HILARION. "Saint Paul, Origen, and many others did not understand
the Scriptures in a literal sense: yet if Holy Writ be explained by
allegories it becomes the portion of a small number, and the evidence
of the truth disappears. What must we do?"

ANTHONY. "We must rely upon the Church!"

HILARION. "Then the Scriptures are useless?"

ANTHONY. "No! no! although I acknowledge that in the Old Testament
there are some ... some obscurities. But the New shines with purest
light."

HILARION. "Nevertheless, the Angel of the annunciation, in Matthew,
appears to Joseph; while, in Luke, he appears to Mary. The anointing
of Jesus by a woman takes place, according to the first Gospel, at the
commencement of his public life; and, according to the other three, a
few days before his death. The drink offered to him on the cross, is,
in Matthew, vinegar mixed with gall; in Mark, it is wine and myrrh.
According to Luke and Matthew, the apostles should take with them
neither money nor scrip for their journey--not even sandals nor staff;
in Mark, on the contrary, Jesus bids them take nothing with them,
except sandals and a staff. I am thereby bewildered!"

ANTHONY (_in amazement_). "Aye, indeed!... in fact...."

HILARION. "At the contact of the woman who had an issue of blood, Jesus
turned and said, 'Who hath touched my garments?' He did not know, then,
who had touched him? That contradicts the omniscience of Jesus! If the
tomb was watched by guards, the women need have felt no anxiety about
finding help to roll away the stone from the tomb. Therefore there
were no guards, or the holy women were not there. At Emmaus, he eats
with his disciples and makes them feel his wounds. It is a human body,
a material and ponderable object; and nevertheless it passes through
walls! Is that possible?"

ANTHONY. "It would require much time to answer thee properly!"

HILARION. "Why did he receive the Holy Spirit, being himself Son of
the Holy Spirit? What need had he of baptism if he was the Word? How
could the Devil have tempted him, inasmuch as he was God? Have these
thoughts never occurred to thee?"

ANTHONY. "Yes!... often! Sometimes torpid, sometimes furious--they
remain forever in my conscience. I crush them; they rise again, they
stifle me; and sometimes I think that I am accursed."

HILARION. "Then it is needless for thee to serve God?"

ANTHONY. "I shall always need to adore Him."

(_After a long silence Hilarion continues_:)

"But aside from dogma, all researches are allowed us. Dost thou desire
to know the hierarchy of the Angels, the virtue of the Numbers, the
reason of germs and of metamorphoses?"

ANTHONY. "Yes! yes! my thought struggles wildly to escape from its
prison. It seems to me that by exerting all my force I might succeed.
Sometimes, for an instant, brief as a lightning flash, I even feel
myself as thought uplifted,--then I fall back again!"

HILARION. "The secret thou wouldst obtain is guarded by sages. They
dwell in a distant land; they are seated beneath giant trees; they
are robed in white; they are calm as Gods! A warm air gives them
sufficient nourishment. All about them, leopards tread upon grassy
turf. The murmuring of fountains and the neighing of unicorns mingle
with their voices. Thou shalt hear them; and the face of the Unknown
shall be unveiled!"

ANTHONY (_sighing_). "The way is long; and I am old."

HILARION. "Oh! oh! wise men are not rare! there are some even very nigh
thee!--here! Let us enter!"


[1] Gibbon, a sincere admirer of Athanasius, gives a curious history of
these charges, and expresses his disbelief in their truth. The story
regarding the design to intercept the corn-fleet of Alexandria is
referred to in the use of the word "monopolist."




IV


(_And Anthony beholds before him a vast basilica._

_The light gushes from the further end, marvellous as a multi-colored
sun. It illuminates the innumerable heads of the crowd that fills the
nave, and that eddies about the columns toward the side-aisles--where
can be perceived, in wooden compartments, altars, beds, little chains
of blue stones linked together, and constellations painted upon the
walls._

_In the midst of the throng there are groups which remain motionless.
Men standing upon stools harangue with fingers uplifted; others are
praying, with arms outstretched in form of a cross; others are lying
prostrate upon the pavement, or singing hymns, or drinking wine; others
of the faithful, seated about a table, celebrate their agape;[1]
martyrs are unbandaging their limbs in order to show their wounds; and
aged men, leaning upon staffs, recount their voyages._

_There are some from the country of the Germans, from Thrace also, and
from the Gauls, from Scythia and from the Indies, with snow upon their
beards, feathers in their hair; thorns in the fringe of their garments;
the sandals of some are black with dust, their skins are burnt by the
sun. There is a vast confusion of costumes, mantles of purple and
robes of linen, embroidered dalmaticas, hair shirts, sailors' caps,
bishops' mitres. Their eyes fulgurate strangely. They have the look of
executioners, or the look of eunuchs._

_Hilarion advances into their midst. All salute him. Anthony, shrinking
closer to his shoulder, observes them. He remarks the presence of a
great many women. Some of these are attired like men, and have their
hair cut short. Anthony feels afraid of them._)

HILARION. "Those are Christian women who have converted their husbands.
Besides, the women were always upon the side of Jesus, even the
idolatrous ones, for example, Procula, the wife of Pilate, and Poppæa,
the concubine of Nero. Do not tremble!--come on."

(_And others are continually arriving._

_They seem to multiply, to double themselves by self-division, light
as shadows--all the while making an immense clamour, in which yells of
rage, cries of love, canticles and objurgations intermingle._)

ANTHONY (_in a low voice_). "What do they desire?"

HILARION. "The Lord said: 'I have yet many things to say to you....
'[2] They possess the knowledge of those things."

(_And he pushes Anthony forward to a golden throne approached by five
steps, whereon--surrounded by ninety-five disciples, all very thin and
pale, and anointed with oil--sits the prophet Manes. He is beautiful
as an archangel, immobile as a statue; he is clad in an Indian robe;
carbuncles gleam in his plaited hair; at his left hand lies a book of
painted images; his right reposes upon a globe. The images represent
the creatures that erst slumbered in Chaos. Anthony bends forward to
look upon them. Then----_)

MANES

(_makes his globe revolve; and regulating the tone of his words by a
lyre which gives forth crystalline sounds, exclaims_:--)

"The celestial earth is at the superior extremity; the terrestrial
earth at the inferior extremity. It is sustained by two angels--the
Angel Splenditeneus, and Omophorus, whose faces are six.

"At the summit of the highest heaven reigns the impassible Divinity;
below, face to face, are the Son of God and the Prince of Darkness.

"When the darkness had advanced even to his kingdom, God evolved from
his own essence a virtue which produced the first man; and he environed
him with the five elements. But the demons of darkness stole from him a
part; and that part is the soul.

"There is but one soul, universally diffused, even as the waters of
a river divided into many branches. It is this universal soul that
sighs in the wind--that shrieks in the marble under the teeth of the
saw--that roars in the voice of the sea--that weeps tears of milk when
the leaves of the fig tree are torn off.

"The souls that leave this world emigrate to the stars, which are
themselves animated beings."

ANTHONY (_bursts into a laugh_). "Ah! ah! what an absurd imagination!"

A MAN (_having no beard, and of a most austere aspect_). "Wherefore
absurd?"

(_Anthony is about to reply when Hilarion tells him in a low voice
that the questioner is none other than the tremendous Origen himself;
and_:--)

MANES (_continues_). "But first they remain awhile in the Moon, where
they are purified. Then they rise into the sun."

ANTHONY (_slowly_). "I do not know of anything ... which prevents us
... from believing it."

MANES. "The proper aim of every creature is the deliverance of the ray
of celestial light imprisoned within matter. It finds easier escape
through the medium of perfumes, spices, the aroma of warmed wine, the
light things which resemble thoughts. But the acts of life retain it
within its prison. The murderer shall be born again in the form of a
celephus; he that kills an animal shall become that animal; if thou
plantest a vine, thou shalt be thyself bound within its boughs. Food
absorbs the celestial light.... Therefore abstain! fast!"

HILARION. "Thou seest, they are temperate!"

MANES. "There is much of it in meats, less of it in herbs. Moreover
the Pure Ones, by means of their great merits, despoil vegetation of
this luminous essence; and, thus liberated, it reascends to its source.
But through generation, animals keep it imprisoned within the flesh!
Therefore, avoid women!"

HILARION. "Admire their continence."

MANES. "Or rather contrive that they shall not create..............[3]

ANTHONY. "Oh--abomination!"

HILARION. "What signifies the hierarchy of turpitudes? The Church has,
forsooth, made marriage a sacrament!"

SATURNINUS (_in Syrian costume_). "He teaches a most dismal system of
the universe!... The Father, desiring to punish the angels who had
revolted, ordered them to create the world. Christ came, in order that
the God of the Jews, who was one of those angels...."

ANTHONY. "He an angel! the Creator!"

CERDO. "Did he not seek to kill Moses, to deceive his own prophets, to
seduce nations?--did he not sow falsehood and idolatry broadcast?"

MARCION. "Certainly, the Creator is not the true God!"

SAINT CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA. "Matter is eternal!"

BARDESANES (_in the costume of the Babylonian magi_). "It was formed by
the Seven Planetary Spirits."

THE HERMIANS. "Souls were made by the angels."

THE PRISCILLIANISTS. "It was the Devil who made the world."

ANTHONY (_rushing back from the circle_). "Horror!"

HILARION (_supporting him_). "Thou despairest too hastily!--thou dost
misapprehend their doctrine! Here is one who received his teaching
directly from Theodas, the friend of St. Paul. Hearken to him."

(_And at a sign from Hilarion_

VALENTINUS

_appears in a tunic of cloth of silver; his skull is pointed at its
summit; his voice has a wheezing sound._)

"The world is the work of a God in delirium!"

ANTHONY (_bending his head down_). "The work of a God in delirium!..."

(_After a long silence_): "How can that be?"

VALENTINE. "The most perfect of beings, and of the Æons, the Abyss;
dwelt in the womb of the Deep together with Thought. By their union was
begotten Intelligence, to whom Truth was given as a companion.

"Intelligence and Truth engendered the Word and Life, who in their turn
begat Man and the Church; and that doth make eight Æons!"

(_He counts upon his fingers._)

"The Word and Truth also produced ten other Æons--which is to say, five
couples. Man and the Church had begotten twelve more--among these the
Paraclete and Faith, Hope and Charity, Perfection and Wisdom--Sophia.

"The union of these thirty Æons constitutes the Pleroma, or
Universality of God. Thus, even as the echo of a passing voice, as the
effluvia of a perfume evaporating, as the fires of the setting sun,
the Powers that emanated from the Principle, forever continue to grow
weaker.

"But Sophia, desirous to know the Father, darted from the Pleroma;
and the Word then made another couple, Christ and the Holy Ghost, who
reunited all the Æons; and all together formed Jesus, the flower of the
Pleroma.

"But the effort of Sophia to flee away had left in the void an image of
her--an evil substance, Acharamoth.[4] The Saviour took pity upon her,
freed her from all passion; and from the smile of Acharamoth redeemed,
light was born; her tears formed the waters; by her sorrow was dark
matter begotten.

"Of Acharamoth was born the Demiurgos,--the fabricator of worlds,
the creator of the heaven and of the Devil. He dwells far below the
Pleroma--so far that he cannot behold it--so that he deems himself to
be the true God, and repeats by the mouths of his prophets--'There is
no other God but I.' Then he made man, and instilled into his soul the
immaterial Seed which was the Church--a reflection of the other Church
established in the Pleroma.

"One day Acharamoth shall reach the highest region and unite herself
with the Saviour; the fire that is hidden in the world shall annihilate
all matter, and shall even devour itself and men, becoming pure
spirits, shall espouse the angels!"

ORIGEN. "Then shall the Demon be over-thrown and the reign of God
commence!"

(_Anthony expresses a cry, and forthwith_)

BASILIDES (_taking him by the elbow, exclaims_:--)

"The Supreme Being with all the infinite emanations is called
Abraxas; and the Saviour with all his virtues, Kaulakau--otherwise,
line-upon-line, rectitude upon rectitude.

"The power of Kaulakau is obtained by the aid of certain words, which
are inscribed upon this chalcedony to help the memory."

(_And he points to a little stone suspended at his neck, upon which
stone fantastic characters are graven._)

"Then thou wilt be transported into the Invisible and placed above all
law; thou shalt contemn all things--even virtue!

"We, the Pure, must flee from pain, after the example of Kaulakau."

ANTHONY. "What! and the cross?"

THE ELKHESAITES (_in robes of hyacinth answers him_). "The woe and
the degradation, the condemnation and oppression of my fathers[5] are
blotted out, through the mission which has come.

"One may deny the inferior Christ, the man--Jesus; but the other Christ
must be adored--whose personality was evolved under the brooding of the
Dove's wings.

"Honor marriage; the Holy Spirit is feminine!"

(_Hilarion has disappeared; and Anthony, carried along by the crowd,
arrives in the presence of_--)

THE CARPOCRATIANS

(_reclining with women upon scarlet cushions._)

"Before entering into the Only thou shalt pass through a series of
conditions and of actions. To free thyself from the powers of darkness,
thou must at once accomplish their works. The husband shall say to the
wife: 'Have charity for thy brother'--and she will kiss thee."

THE NICOLAITANS

(_gathered about a mass of smoking meats_:)

"This is a portion of the meat offered to idols;--partake of it!
Apostasy is permissible when the heart is pure. Gorge thy flesh with
all that it demands. Seek to exterminate it by dint of debauchery!
Prounikos, the Mother of Heaven, wallowed in ignominies."

THE MARCOSIANS

(_wearing rings of gold, and glistening with precious balm and
unguents_:)

"Enter among us that thou mayst unite thyself to the Spirit! Enter
among us that thou mayst quaff the draught of immortality!"

(_And one of them shows him, behind a tapestry-hanging, the body of a
man terminated by the head of an ass. This represents Sabaoth, father
of the Devil. He spits upon the image in token of detestation._

_Another shows him a very low bed, strewn with flowers, exclaiming_:)

"The spiritual marriage is about to be consummated."

(_A third, who holds a cup of glass, utters an invocation;--blood
suddenly appears in the cup_:)

"Ah! behold it! behold it!--the blood of Christ!"

(_Anthony withdraws, but finds himself be-spattered by water splashed
from a cistern._)

THE HELVIDIANS

(_are flinging themselves into it head foremost, muttering_:--)

"The man regenerated by baptism is impeccable!"

(_Then he passes by a great fire at which the Adamites are warming
themselves--all completely naked in imitation of the purity of
Paradise; and he stumbles over_)

THE MESSALINES

(_wallowing upon the pavement, half-slumbering, stupid_:)

"Oh! crush us if thou wilt! we shall not move! Work is crime; all
occupation is evil."

(_Behind these, the abject_)

PATERNIANS

(_--men, women, and children lying pell mell upon a heap of filth, lift
their hideous faces, wine-besmeared, and they cry aloud_:)

"The inferior parts of the body, which were created by the Devil,
belong to him! Let us eat, drink, and sin!"

ÆTIUS. "Crimes are necessities beneath the notice of God!"

(_But suddenly_--)

A MAN (--_clad in a Carthaginian mantle, bounds into their midst,
brandishing a scourge of thongs in his hand; and strikes violently and
indiscriminately at all in his path_:)

"Ah! imposters! simonists, heretics and demons!--vermin of the
schools!--dregs of hell! Marcion, there, is a sailor of Sinopus
excommunicated for incest;--Carpocrates was banished for being a
magician; Ætius stole his concubine; Nicholas prostituted his wife;
and this Manes, who calls himself the Buddha, and whose real name is
Cubricus, was flayed alive with the point of a reed, so that his skin
even now hangs at the gates of Ctesiphon!"

ANTHONY (_recognizing Tertullian, rushes to join him_): "Master! help!
help!"

TERTULLIAN (_continuing_):

"Break the images! veil the virgins! Pray, fast, weep and mortify
yourselves! No philosophy! no books! After Jesus, science is useless!"

(_All have fled away; and Anthony beholds, in lieu of Tertullian, a
woman seated upon a bench of stone._

_She sobs; leaning her head against a column; her hair is loose; her
body, weakened by grief, is clad in a long brown simar. Then they find
themselves face to face and alone, far from the crowd; and a silence,
an extraordinary stillness falls--as in the woods when the winds are
lulled, and the leaves of the trees suddenly cease to whisper._

_This woman is still very beautiful, although faded, and pale as a
sepulcher. They look at one another; and their eyes send to each other
waves, as it were, of thoughts, bearing drift of a thousand ancient
things, confused, mysterious. At last_--)

PRISCILLA (_speaks_:)

"I was in the last chamber of the baths; and the rumbling sounds of the
street caused a sleep to fall upon me.

"Suddenly I heard a clamour of voices. Men were shouting--'It is a
magician!--it is the Devil!' And the crowd stopped before our house, in
front of the Temple Æsculapius. I drew myself up with my hands to the
little window.

"Upon the peristyle of the temple, there stood a man who wore about his
neck a collar of iron. He took burning coals out of a chafing-dish, and
with them drew lines across his breast, the while crying out--'Jesus!
Jesus!' The people shouted--'This is not lawful! let us stone him!'
But he continued. Oh! those were unheard of marvels--things which
transported men who beheld them! Flowers broad as suns circled before
my eyes, and I heard in the spaces above me the vibrations of a golden
harp. Day died. My hands loosened their grasp of the window-bars; my
body fell back, and when he had led me away to his house...."

ANTHONY. "But of whom art thou speaking?"

PRISCILLA. "Why, of Montanus!"

ANTHONY. "Montanus is dead!"

PRISCILLA. "It is not true!"

A VOICE. "No: Montanus is not dead!"

(_Anthony turns; and sees upon the bench near him, on the opposite
side, another woman sitting; she is fair, and even paler than the
other; there are swellings under her eyes, as though she had wept a
long time. She speaks without being questioned_:)

MAXIMILLA. "We were returning from Tarsus by way of the mountains,
when, at a turn in the road, we saw a man under a fig tree.