CHAPTER I

A CONDITIONAL BARGAIN


“Far as we go!”

As the conductor of the trolley made this announcement, the car came
to a stop in a suburb of Newark, New Jersey. About two blocks beyond
the end of the line, and almost on the edge of the salt marshes, rose a
new and wide two-story brick building. Even from that distance could be
heard the hum of men and machines.

“Much obliged,” answered the man. “That the place?”

The conductor nodded.

“Thanks,” said the passenger, who, although apparently a middle-aged
man, sprang lightly to the ground. “Have a cigar?”

“If you don’t mind,” answered the conductor, “I’ll save it until this
evening. I don’t often get a smoke like this.”

The man laughed, shoved his hand into the side pocket of his loose coat
and drew out two more high-priced cigars.

“Never put off a good thing too long,” he added, “you may lose it. Grab
things while they’re in reach. Give one to your friend Bill up there.”

As the man, still smiling, turned to go, the conductor called out:

“Thanks, Colonel, I guess you’re a westerner. Folks ’round here haven’t
got sense enough to wear a hat like that.”

“You’re a good guesser,” replied the man; “I’m from Utah. Good bye.”

A few minutes later, the man was standing before a door in the long
building, labeled “Office.” Above the entrance was a small, new
sign: AMERICAN AEROPLANE COMPANY. It was a hot morning, and, as
the man stopped to wipe his perspiring face with a big, white silk
handkerchief, he swung a picturesque gray plainsman’s hat before him
like a fan. He was without a vest, and wore a narrow, dark belt. But,
beyond these, a negligee shirt and a brown flowing neck tie, there was
no sign of the westerner about him. His trousers, coat and shoes were
all fashionable and apparently of eastern make.

As he stood before the door, he looked at his watch. Then he whistled
softly to himself.

“Ten fifteen!” he exclaimed, under his breath. “An hour and a half from
the Waldorf. The same goin’ back--that’s a quarter to twelve. An’ I’ve
got to catch the limited at two.”

He opened the door and stepped into a large room where two or three
girls and a couple of young men were busy at typewriters, file cases
and telephones.

“The boss in?” asked the visitor of a young man who greeted him.

“Do you mean the manager, Mr. Atkinson?”

“Like as not! The man who sells airships.”

“Have you a card?”

“Some’eres, I guess. But just tell him there’s man out here wants to
talk flyin’-machine if he’s got time.”

“Won’t you sit down?” persisted the clerk. “I’ll see if he’s busy.”

“Just tell him I’m kind o’ busy, too.”

While the clerk disappeared within a room opening out of the main
office, the active westerner made a hasty examination of the place. On
a table within the railed-off space in which he stood was a tray of
business cards. He picked one up and read it:

                      AMERICAN AEROPLANE COMPANY
                      Factory: Newark, New Jersey
               Offices: New York, London, Paris, Chicago
                   Mr. Robert T. Atkinson, President
                       Capital Stock $1,000,000
                 Tested Aeroplanes Ready for Delivery

“This Mr. Atkinson?” began the westerner when he had been ushered into
that gentleman’s private office.

“I am,” responded the aeroplane company official. “Pretty hot?”

“Hot enough,” smiled back the visitor; “but I don’t mind the heat when
I can find a little shade occasionally and a drink of water. Out my way
we’re a little shy on shade and water. I’m from Utah. And that ain’t
the worst--I’m from southern Utah.”

President Atkinson motioned to a chair next the open window.

“Never been there,” he replied in much the same tone he might have said
he had never visited the north pole.

“Few people have,” added the westerner. “Don’t mind if I smoke, do you?”

Before he could find one of his own cigars, the aeroplane manager had
thrust at him a box of perfectos. Mr. Atkinson at once saw in the
stranger a man of affairs, who had not come all the way out to the
aeroplane factory to gossip. He judged correctly.

“I’ve got a card somewhere,” began the westerner briskly, as he closed
a pair of white, steel-trap-like teeth on the cigar, “but it don’t say
nothin’ but that my name’s Cook--R. C. Cook. I’m from Bluff, Utah.”

“Glad to meet you, Mr. Cook,” politely remarked the easterner,
wondering at the same time what possible business Mr. Cook, of Bluff,
Utah, could have with the American Aeroplane Company.

“I’m in New York on a quick trip, but I saw one of your circulars last
night. I cut this out. It’s yours, ain’t it?”

Mr. Atkinson glanced at the clipping, smiled and nodded.

The circular read:

    “The aeroplane is no longer a novelty or a wonder. The American
    Aeroplane Company, organized with a paid-up capital stock
    of $1,000,000, is now ready to deliver reliable and tested
    aeroplanes, standardized in make-up and ready to fly. We
    offer F. O. B. Newark, New Jersey, a complete car for $5,000.
    It comprehends every development up to date. The frame is
    of Oregon spruce and bamboo--the planes of rubberized silk
    balloon cloth. The power plant is a four-cylinder, gasoline,
    water-cooled motorcycle engine, 25 H. P., cylinders 3¾ by 4.
    The control is extremely simple. The elevation is regulated by
    a steering lever, the balancing planes are specially designed
    devices controlled by the movement of the feet. The machine
    starts from the ground without track or outside help, and it
    can be taken apart in two hours.”

“That’s the price, is it?” added Mr. Cook, taking a long puff at his
cigar.

“Just reduced,” explained Mr. Atkinson. “Our first machines sold for
seven thousand dollars. But we mean to lead in this business. We have
purchased every patent that we believe is needed in making a high-class
aeroplane; and with our facilities we mean to popularize aeroplanes
until they become as common as automobiles.”

“I want one of ’em,” said Mr. Cook.

The manager nodded his head as if the customer had ordered a bicycle or
a buggy.

“That is,” added Mr. Cook, “providin’--”

He took another puff on his cigar, and then added:

“I want one if I can find some one to run the thing.”

Mr. Atkinson shrugged his shoulders.

“That’s the only trouble that confronts us, Mr. Cook. We have as yet
developed no training-school for aviators, as we have schools for
chauffeurs.”

“Well,” exclaimed Mr. Cook, laughing and shaking his head, “I think one
of them flyin’-machines’ll fit in my business all right, but you’ll
have to find me a man to work it. I’ve crossed Death’s desert, I’ve
gone down the big Canyon, I’ve chased and been chased by the Utes, and
I may do all of them things again. But there’s one thing I wouldn’t
do--I wouldn’t risk my neck in the best aeroplane ever made.”

Mr. Atkinson smiled.

“I’d like to sell you one of our machines, my friend; but I can’t
promise to find you a capable operator. Tell me,” he added, unable to
longer restrain his curiosity, “what use do you figure on making of the
machine?”

“I ought to told you,” hastened the would-be purchaser in explanation.
“We got a company out in Utah--mostly New York people,” he added
parenthetically--“the Utah Mining and Development Company. I’m the
manager. Mr. F. E. Estebrook, of Hartford, is the president.”

Mr. Cook immediately rose in Mr. Atkinson’s estimation. Mr. Estebrook
was one of the wealthy insurance men of Connecticut. No one stood
higher in the New York financial world.

“I see,” observed Mr. Atkinson, now glad that he had extended to the
westerner his best box of cigars.

“Well,” went on Mr. Cook, “we’ve got a big lot of work cut out down
there in the desert--petroleum mainly,” he explained, “but metal, too.
And just now it’s all prospecting. Maybe you don’t know southern Utah?”

The aeroplane company manager smiled in the negative.

“When they git done tellin’ you about the plains of Arizona, and New
Mexico, just add one hundred per cent and call it Utah,” went on Mr.
Cook. “It ain’t sand and bunch grass down there,” he added, with a grim
smile. “It’s alkali deserts, borax holes, rotten volcano craters and
river beds that ain’t seen water in a thousand years.”

“Don’t the Colorado and Green rivers run through it?” asked Mr.
Atkinson, stepping to a large wall map.

Mr. Cook grunted.

“They do,” he explained, “right through it, and they might as well be
buried in steel tubes. What you goin’ to do with a river shootin’ along
at the bottom of a gash in the ground a half mile deep? Mr. Atkinson,”
continued the westerner. “I’ve known many a man to die o’ thirst on
the banks of them rivers with the sound o’ gurglin’ water in his ears.
As for gettin’ to that water, well you might reach it with a shot
gun--nothin’ else.”

Mr. Atkinson turned, ready to hear Mr. Cook’s explanation:

“I went to Utah five years ago--I’m a Pennsylvanian. My hair was black
then. It’s gray now. I got that in one week down in the San Juan river
canyon. Sailin’ an aeroplane down there ain’t a goin’ to be no county
fair job.”

“I don’t quite understand,” exclaimed Mr. Atkinson.

“It’s this,” explained Mr. Cook. “We’ve got from four to eight
prospectin’ parties out on them deserts all the time. For weeks and
months we don’t hear from them. Now and then, with the use of a few
hardened plainsmen, we get word to them and reports back. It would
be a big help to us if we could keep in touch with them. And, more
often, it would be a big help to them. They say an aeroplane can travel
forty-five miles an hour. Why can’t I use it to keep track of our
prospectors?”

Mr. Atkinson sat up, perplexed and surprised.

“It’s a novel idea,” he said, at last, “but I can’t see why it isn’t
just the thing. Looks to me as if it is--” then he stopped. Mr.
Atkinson’s business instinct had brought him a sudden idea. “Mr. Cook,”
he added, a moment later, “we talk a good deal about the practicability
of the aeroplane. This is the first real, business demand I have
yet had for an aeroplane. The idea is great. There is no doubt the
aeroplane can be utilized in just the way you outline. Within a radius
of two hundred and fifty miles it could make daily visits to the
remotest of your men, take orders to them, bring back reports, and--if
necessary--carry them food and water.”

“Looked that way to me,” interrupted the westerner.

“No question about it. I’m going to make you a proposition. Our
machines are selling at five thousand dollars. I’m so sure of the
advertising possibilities of your project, that I’m going to make you
a price of four thousand dollars. I can’t miss this chance to make a
real demonstration of the practicability of the aeroplane.”

“The price ain’t botherin’ me,” commented the westerner. “How about
some one to work it? Some one who can stand Utah and borax and
alkali--maybe Indians. You can fix his wages.”

Mr. Atkinson’s face lengthened.

“That’s another matter,” he said after a pause.

“Haven’t any one on tap?”

The aeroplane company manager shook his head. Mr. Cook looked at his
watch. Then he grunted his disappointment.

“Well,” he said, rising, “it was an idea. If you can’t help me, I guess
no one can. I’ve got to go--got to catch the two o’clock limited. Just
keep my card. My offer stands. I’ll make it five thousand dollars for a
machine if you send a man to do the trick. You can take four thousand
dollars if you like and give some one a bonus of the other thousand
to take the chance. I’ll pay him what you say and keep him long as he
wants to stay.”

Mr. Atkinson was thinking hard.

“I’m trying to think of some one with experience and grit,” he said.

“If you do,” said the westerner, shaking hands with Mr. Atkinson, “nail
him, and send him to me. If he wants excitement, I’ll guarantee him the
time of his life.”




CHAPTER II

AN EXPERIMENTAL FLIGHT


For some minutes, Mr. Atkinson sat in thought. At last he was
interrupted by a man who hurried in from the factory portion of the
building. The new arrival was in his shirt sleeves, a mechanic’s cap
was far back on his half-bald head, and his hands and face were marked
with the smear of machinery.

“Good morning, George,” exclaimed the manager.

“Morning,” responded the man tersely. “Thought you might like to come
out. We got that new model ready--the double propeller. Goin’ to try
the wheels on a new pitch.”

“Certainly,” responded Mr. Atkinson, placing Mr. Cook’s card in a
pigeonhole. “Sold four machines this morning, Osborne,” he added. “Got
three orders by mail--two from Paris, one from Chicago. Sold another
machine to a man from Utah.”

Mr. Atkinson was full of enthusiasm, but, apparently, the man in his
shirt sleeves cared little for this.

“I’m sure we’ve got a better pitch,” the mechanic interrupted. “Anyway,
we’ll know in a few minutes.”

Mr. Atkinson only smiled. He made no further attempt to impart his
gratification to his companion, and the two men passed out through the
business office into the big workroom.

The man wearing the cap was George M. Osborne, skilled mechanic and
inventor. In the advertisements of the company, he was known as
the “engineer and mechanical director.” Mr. Osborne, the highest
paid mechanic in Newark--one of the leading manufacturing cities
in America--had only recently been secured by the newly organized
aeroplane company. It was his ingenuity and practical methods that had
already combined a dozen patents in an ideal flying-machine.

“A one-propeller car will always be popular,” Osborne insisted, “but
two propellers are as essential for long distance work as two screws to
a steamer. If one gives out, you have the other.”

As the two men made their way through the orderly but humming workroom,
Mr. Osborne fell back by Mr. Atkinson’s side, and said:

“I’m trying a new operator, too, this morning.”

“We ought to start a school for them,” answered the manager, thinking
of his talk with the western prospector.

“And I’d like to have you give him a job,” added the engineer.

“Certainly,” answered his companion. “Hire all of them you can find
that’ll do. Your new man ever had any experience?”

“A little. But he isn’t a man. It’s my own boy, Royce.”

“Roy, your son,” exclaimed Mr. Atkinson, as if surprised. “How old is
he?”

“Just over seventeen. But I think he’ll do. He’s spent all his
Saturdays here since we started up, and now his school’s out, and he’s
determined to go to work.”

“And you aren’t afraid to let him take a chance in the new machine?”
asked the manager.

“I guess he understands it about as well as any of us.”

“I’ve seen him around here a good deal.”

“It has been his playground,” explained the boy’s father. “He’d rather
be alongside my bench than idling away his time. He knows the car and
engine all right.”

Passing out of the shop, the men came into the experimenting ground--an
enclosed space of perhaps twenty acres. Beneath a shed at the far end
of the factory building a half dozen men were standing idly about the
delicate and graceful frame of an aeroplane--the “American Aeroplane
Model No. 2.” In their midst, stood a light-haired, gray-eyed boy of
compact, muscular build and a countenance a little too old, perhaps,
for his years.

“Good morning, Roy,” exclaimed Mr. Atkinson. “Your father says you want
to turn aviator.”

“Yes, sir,” answered the boy, doffing an absurd little school hat, “I’m
looking for the job.”

“Aren’t you afraid?” asked the manager, smiling, however, as he asked
it.

“I hadn’t thought of that,” answered the boy. “I’m only wondering if
the new pitch is right.”

Mr. Atkinson seemed about to say something, but paused. Finally he
remarked:

“All right. But don’t take chances. Make a low flight.”

The attendants at once shouldered the car and carried it out into the
open. Roy pulled his little school cap well down on his head, and
climbed aboard. Mr. Osborne, who had disappeared for a moment, now
returned with a ball of twine. Quickly unrolling about fifty feet of
it, he tied an end of the cord to the aeroplane frame. At the other end
of the string, he tied his handkerchief.

“Now, young man,” he said with parental sternness to Roy, “no more
excuses about not knowing how far above the ground you are. This is
a mechanical test, not a circus exhibition. Keep that handkerchief
dragging on the ground. D’ye hear?”

“Yes, father,” laughed the boy, “only I don’t want that handkerchief
and the knot. It’s all right if I don’t happen to pass over a fence. A
little catch in a crack wouldn’t do a thing but upset me.” He untied
the handkerchief and handed it back. “I’ll watch the string--this time.
But never again.” And he laughed.

“Don’t know but you’re right,” remarked Mr. Osborne.

“Sure he is,” added Mr. Atkinson with a broad smile. “All ready, boys?”
he added, turning to the workmen.

“All ready here,” came from the boy.

“Go ahead,” exclaimed Mr. Osborne.

Roy’s eager hands turned on his gasoline. As the two propellers darted
into action and the horizontal, spidery planes began to tremble as if
semi-buoyant already, the attendants sprang forward.

“Keep away,” exclaimed the boy in the car. “Keep away. Give her a
chance.”

The men stepped back again.

“That’s right,” added Mr. Atkinson. “Give it a chance.”

“She don’t need any help,” exclaimed Mr. Osborne, with professional
pride. “No startin’ track with this car.”

Even while he spoke, the aeroplane gave a little preliminary bound and
then suddenly shot forward, the twine snapping behind it. Mr. Osborne,
in developing the flying-machine idea, had used two plane surfaces, but
instead of being superimposed, one was behind the other. And, instead
of being practically flat surfaces, his two planes were curved, the aft
one so markedly so as to resemble a bird’s wing.

[Illustration: “THE BOY HAS A STEADY HAND”]

The anxious spectators saw the big, horizontal nine-foot rudder or
guiding surface behind the rear plane straighten itself out and the
aeroplane settle on its course. Mr. Osborne made an attempt to run
forward as if to better observe the working of the propellers on their
new pitch. But the car was too fast for him. It was already curving on
its first turn and working perfectly. Three times the flying-machine
cut around the experiment yard, skimming the ground so closely at times
that the observers kept a sharp lookout to save their heads.

“Looks all right, eh?” remarked the engineer, with no little pride.

“The boy has a steady hand,” answered the manager, as if he had
forgotten that the flight was a test of the engine and not of the
amateur aviator.

“Oh, the boy’s all right,” exclaimed Mr. Osborne. “I don’t know as I
like to have him do it, but, as far as ability is concerned, he knows
as much as a good many who have been at it longer.”

He had already called out to Roy to come down, and the car, with power
shut off, was fluttering to the ground, some yards away.

The two men advanced to the landed machine.

Roy, his sober face showing just a little flush of pride in his first
real flight, was attempting to look unconcerned as Mr. Atkinson came up
to him and patted him on the back.

“Very well done, my boy,” exclaimed the manager. “Didn’t frighten you,
did it?”

“I was only worried about that string,” answered Roy. “It kept snappin’
like the tail of a kite.”

The workmen were already moving the car to the shed, and Mr. Osborne
was following them, when the manager called him back.

“Osborne,” he said, laying a hand on Roy’s shoulder, “are you really
willing for your boy to turn professional aviator?”

“Seems to have made a pretty good start already,” was the non-committal
answer.

“That’ll be all right,” broke in Roy, with a smile. “He’ll be willing.
At least, he says it isn’t any more dangerous than runnin’ an
automobile. May I have a job, Mr. Atkinson?”