CHAPTER 1. LESS BREAD! MORE TAXES!

--and then all the people cheered again, and one man, who was more
excited than the rest, flung his hat high into the air, and shouted
(as well as I could make out) “Who roar for the Sub-Warden?” Everybody
roared, but whether it was for the Sub-Warden, or not, did not clearly
appear: some were shouting “Bread!” and some “Taxes!”, but no one seemed
to know what it was they really wanted.

All this I saw from the open window of the Warden's breakfast-saloon,
looking across the shoulder of the Lord Chancellor, who had sprung
to his feet the moment the shouting began, almost as if he had been
expecting it, and had rushed to the window which commanded the best view
of the market-place.

“What can it all mean?” he kept repeating to himself, as, with his hands
clasped behind him, and his gown floating in the air, he paced rapidly
up and down the room. “I never heard such shouting before--and at this
time of the morning, too! And with such unanimity! Doesn't it strike you
as very remarkable?”

I represented, modestly, that to my ears it appeared that they were
shouting for different things, but the Chancellor would not listen to my
suggestion for a moment. “They all shout the same words, I assure you!”
 he said: then, leaning well out of the window, he whispered to a man who
was standing close underneath, “Keep'em together, ca'n't you? The Warden
will be here directly. Give'em the signal for the march up!” All this
was evidently not meant for my ears, but I could scarcely help hearing
it, considering that my chin was almost on the Chancellor's shoulder.

The 'march up' was a very curious sight:

{Image...The march-up}

a straggling procession of men, marching two and two, began from the
other side of the market-place, and advanced in an irregular zig-zag
fashion towards the Palace, wildly tacking from side to side, like a
sailing vessel making way against an unfavourable wind so that the head
of the procession was often further from us at the end of one tack than
it had been at the end of the previous one.

Yet it was evident that all was being done under orders, for I noticed
that all eyes were fixed on the man who stood just under the window, and
to whom the Chancellor was continually whispering. This man held his hat
in one hand and a little green flag in the other: whenever he waved the
flag the procession advanced a little nearer, when he dipped it they
sidled a little farther off, and whenever he waved his hat they all
raised a hoarse cheer. “Hoo-roah!” they cried, carefully keeping time
with the hat as it bobbed up and down. “Hoo-roah! Noo! Consti! Tooshun!
Less! Bread! More! Taxes!”

“That'll do, that'll do!” the Chancellor whispered. “Let 'em rest a bit
till I give you the word. He's not here yet!” But at this moment the
great folding-doors of the saloon were flung open, and he turned with a
guilty start to receive His High Excellency. However it was only Bruno,
and the Chancellor gave a little gasp of relieved anxiety.

“Morning!” said the little fellow, addressing the remark, in a general
sort of way, to the Chancellor and the waiters. “Doos oo know where
Sylvie is? I's looking for Sylvie!”

“She's with the Warden, I believe, y'reince!” the Chancellor replied
with a low bow. There was, no doubt, a certain amount of absurdity in
applying this title (which, as of course you see without my telling you,
was nothing but 'your Royal Highness' condensed into one syllable) to
a small creature whose father was merely the Warden of Outland: still,
large excuse must be made for a man who had passed several years at the
Court of Fairyland, and had there acquired the almost impossible art of
pronouncing five syllables as one.

But the bow was lost upon Bruno, who had run out of the room, even
while the great feat of The Unpronounceable Monosyllable was being
triumphantly performed.

Just then, a single voice in the distance was understood to shout “A
speech from the Chancellor!” “Certainly, my friends!” the Chancellor
replied with extraordinary promptitude. “You shall have a speech!”
 Here one of the waiters, who had been for some minutes busy making a
queer-looking mixture of egg and sherry, respectfully presented it on
a large silver salver. The Chancellor took it haughtily, drank it off
thoughtfully, smiled benevolently on the happy waiter as he set down the
empty glass, and began. To the best of my recollection this is what he
said.

“Ahem! Ahem! Ahem! Fellow-sufferers, or rather suffering fellows--”
 (“Don't call 'em names!” muttered the man under the window. “I didn't
say felons!” the Chancellor explained.) “You may be sure that I always
sympa--” (“'Ear, 'ear!” shouted the crowd, so loudly as quite to drown
the orator's thin squeaky voice) “--that I always sympa--” he repeated.
(“Don't simper quite so much!” said the man under the window. “It makes
yer look a hidiot!” And, all this time, “'Ear, 'ear!” went rumbling
round the market-place, like a peal of thunder.) “That I always
sympathise!” yelled the Chancellor, the first moment there was silence.
“But your true friend is the Sub-Warden! Day and night he is brooding on
your wrongs--I should say your rights--that is to say your wrongs--no,
I mean your rights--” (“Don't talk no more!” growled the man under the
window. “You're making a mess of it!”) At this moment the Sub-Warden
entered the saloon. He was a thin man, with a mean and crafty face,
and a greenish-yellow complexion; and he crossed the room very slowly,
looking suspiciously about him as if he thought there might be a savage
dog hidden somewhere. “Bravo!” he cried, patting the Chancellor on the
back. “You did that speech very well indeed. Why, you're a born orator,
man!”

“Oh, that's nothing!” the Chancellor replied, modestly, with downcast
eyes. “Most orators are born, you know.”

The Sub-Warden thoughtfully rubbed his chin. “Why, so they are!” he
admitted. “I never considered it in that light. Still, you did it very
well. A word in your ear!”

The rest of their conversation was all in whispers: so, as I could hear
no more, I thought I would go and find Bruno.

I found the little fellow standing in the passage, and being addressed
by one of the men in livery, who stood before him, nearly bent double
from extreme respectfulness, with his hands hanging in front of him
like the fins of a fish. “His High Excellency,” this respectful man was
saying, “is in his Study, y'reince!” (He didn't pronounce this quite so
well as the Chancellor.) Thither Bruno trotted, and I thought it well to
follow him.

The Warden, a tall dignified man with a grave but very pleasant face,
was seated before a writing-table, which was covered with papers, and
holding on his knee one of the sweetest and loveliest little maidens it
has ever been my lot to see. She looked four or five years older than
Bruno, but she had the same rosy cheeks and sparkling eyes, and the same
wealth of curly brown hair. Her eager smiling face was turned upwards
towards her father's, and it was a pretty sight to see the mutual love
with which the two faces--one in the Spring of Life, the other in its
late Autumn--were gazing on each other.

“No, you've never seen him,” the old man was saying: “you couldn't, you
know, he's been away so long--traveling from land to land, and seeking
for health, more years than you've been alive, little Sylvie!” Here
Bruno climbed upon his other knee, and a good deal of kissing, on a
rather complicated system, was the result.

“He only came back last night,” said the Warden, when the kissing was
over: “he's been traveling post-haste, for the last thousand miles or
so, in order to be here on Sylvie's birthday. But he's a very early
riser, and I dare say he's in the Library already. Come with me and see
him. He's always kind to children. You'll be sure to like him.”

“Has the Other Professor come too?” Bruno asked in an awe-struck voice.

“Yes, they arrived together. The Other Professor is--well, you won't
like him quite so much, perhaps. He's a little more dreamy, you know.”

“I wiss Sylvie was a little more dreamy,” said Bruno.

“What do you mean, Bruno?” said Sylvie.

Bruno went on addressing his father. “She says she ca'n't, oo know. But
I thinks it isn't ca'n't, it's wo'n't.”

“Says she ca'n't dream!” the puzzled Warden repeated.

“She do say it,” Bruno persisted. “When I says to her 'Let's stop
lessons!', she says 'Oh, I ca'n't dream of letting oo stop yet!'”

“He always wants to stop lessons,” Sylvie explained, “five minutes after
we begin!”

“Five minutes' lessons a day!” said the Warden. “You won't learn much at
that rate, little man!”

“That's just what Sylvie says,” Bruno rejoined. “She says I wo'n't learn
my lessons. And I tells her, over and over, I ca'n't learn 'em. And what
doos oo think she says? She says 'It isn't ca'n't, it's wo'n't!'”

“Let's go and see the Professor,” the Warden said, wisely avoiding
further discussion. The children got down off his knees, each secured a
hand, and the happy trio set off for the Library--followed by me. I had
come to the conclusion by this time that none of the party (except, for
a few moments, the Lord Chancellor) was in the least able to see me.

“What's the matter with him?” Sylvie asked, walking with a little extra
sedateness, by way of example to Bruno at the other side, who never
ceased jumping up and down.

{Image...Visiting the profesor}

“What was the matter--but I hope he's all right now--was lumbago, and
rheumatism, and that kind of thing. He's been curing himself, you
know: he's a very learned doctor. Why, he's actually invented three new
diseases, besides a new way of breaking your collar-bone!”

“Is it a nice way?” said Bruno.

“Well, hum, not very,” the Warden said, as we entered the Library. “And
here is the Professor. Good morning, Professor! Hope you're quite rested
after your journey!”

A jolly-looking, fat little man, in a flowery dressing-gown, with a
large book under each arm, came trotting in at the other end of the
room, and was going straight across without taking any notice of the
children. “I'm looking for Vol. Three,” he said. “Do you happen to have
seen it?”

“You don't see my children, Professor!” the Warden exclaimed, taking him
by the shoulders and turning him round to face them.

The Professor laughed violently: then he gazed at them through his great
spectacles, for a minute or two, without speaking.

At last he addressed Bruno. “I hope you have had a good night, my
child?” Bruno looked puzzled. “I's had the same night oo've had,” he
replied. “There's only been one night since yesterday!”

It was the Professor's turn to look puzzled now. He took off his
spectacles, and rubbed them with his handkerchief. Then he gazed at them
again. Then he turned to the Warden. “Are they bound?” he enquired.

“No, we aren't,” said Bruno, who thought himself quite able to answer
this question.

The Professor shook his head sadly. “Not even half-bound?”

“Why would we be half-bound?” said Bruno.

“We're not prisoners!”

But the Professor had forgotten all about them by this time, and was
speaking to the Warden again. “You'll be glad to hear,” he was saying,
“that the Barometer's beginning to move--”

“Well, which way?” said the Warden--adding, to the children, “Not that
I care, you know. Only he thinks it affects the weather. He's a
wonderfully clever man, you know. Sometimes he says things that only the
Other Professor can understand. Sometimes he says things that nobody can
understand! Which way is it, Professor? Up or down?”

“Neither!” said the Professor, gently clapping his hands. “It's going
sideways--if I may so express myself.”

“And what kind of weather does that produce?” said the Warden. “Listen,
children! Now you'll hear something worth knowing!”

“Horizontal weather,” said the Professor, and made straight for the
door, very nearly trampling on Bruno, who had only just time to get out
of his way.

“Isn't he learned?” the Warden said, looking after him with admiring
eyes. “Positively he runs over with learning!”

“But he needn't run over me!” said Bruno.

The Professor was back in a moment: he had changed his dressing-gown for
a frock-coat, and had put on a pair of very strange-looking boots, the
tops of which were open umbrellas. “I thought you'd like to see them,”
 he said. “These are the boots for horizontal weather!”

{Image...Boots for horizontal weather}

“But what's the use of wearing umbrellas round one's knees?”

“In ordinary rain,” the Professor admitted, “they would not be of
much use. But if ever it rained horizontally, you know, they would be
invaluable--simply invaluable!”

“Take the Professor to the breakfast-saloon, children,” said the Warden.
“And tell them not to wait for me. I had breakfast early, as I've some
business to attend to.” The children seized the Professor's hands, as
familiarly as if they had known him for years, and hurried him away. I
followed respectfully behind.






CHAPTER 2. L'AMIE INCONNUE.

As we entered the breakfast-saloon, the Professor was saying “--and he
had breakfast by himself, early: so he begged you wouldn't wait for him,
my Lady. This way, my Lady,” he added, “this way!” And then, with (as it
seemed to me) most superfluous politeness, he flung open the door of my
compartment, and ushered in “--a young and lovely lady!” I muttered to
myself with some bitterness. “And this is, of course, the opening
scene of Vol. I. She is the Heroine. And I am one of those subordinate
characters that only turn up when needed for the development of her
destiny, and whose final appearance is outside the church, waiting to
greet the Happy Pair!”

“Yes, my Lady, change at Fayfield,” were the next words I heard (oh that
too obsequious Guard!), “next station but one.” And the door closed, and
the lady settled down into her corner, and the monotonous throb of the
engine (making one feel as if the train were some gigantic monster,
whose very circulation we could feel) proclaimed that we were once more
speeding on our way. “The lady had a perfectly formed nose,” I caught
myself saying to myself, “hazel eyes, and lips--” and here it occurred
to me that to see, for myself, what “the lady” was really like, would be
more satisfactory than much speculation.

I looked round cautiously, and--was entirely disappointed of my hope.
The veil, which shrouded her whole face, was too thick for me to see
more than the glitter of bright eyes and the hazy outline of what might
be a lovely oval face, but might also, unfortunately, be an equally
unlovely one. I closed my eyes again, saying to myself “--couldn't have
a better chance for an experiment in Telepathy! I'll think out her face,
and afterwards test the portrait with the original.”

At first, no result at all crowned my efforts, though I 'divided my
swift mind,' now hither, now thither, in a way that I felt sure would
have made AEneas green with envy: but the dimly-seen oval remained as
provokingly blank as ever--a mere Ellipse, as if in some mathematical
diagram, without even the Foci that might be made to do duty as a nose
and a mouth. Gradually, however, the conviction came upon me that I
could, by a certain concentration of thought, think the veil away, and
so get a glimpse of the mysterious face--as to which the two questions,
“is she pretty?” and “is she plain?”, still hung suspended, in my mind,
in beautiful equipoise.

Success was partial--and fitful--still there was a result: ever and
anon, the veil seemed to vanish, in a sudden flash of light: but,
before I could fully realise the face, all was dark again. In each such
glimpse, the face seemed to grow more childish and more innocent:
and, when I had at last thought the veil entirely away, it was,
unmistakeably, the sweet face of little Sylvie!

“So, either I've been dreaming about Sylvie,” I said to myself, “and
this is the reality. Or else I've really been with Sylvie, and this is a
dream! Is Life itself a dream, I wonder?”

To occupy the time, I got out the letter, which had caused me to take
this sudden railway-journey from my London home down to a strange
fishing-town on the North coast, and read it over again:--


    “DEAR OLD FRIEND,

    “I'm sure it will be as great a pleasure to me, as it can possibly
    be to you, to meet once more after so many years: and of course I
    shall be ready to give you all the benefit of such medical skill as
    I have: only, you know, one mustn't violate professional etiquette!
    And you are already in the hands of a first-rate London doctor,
    with whom it would be utter affectation for me to pretend to compete.
    (I make no doubt he is right in saying the heart is affected:
    all your symptoms point that way.) One thing, at any rate, I have
    already done in my doctorial capacity--secured you a bedroom on the
    ground-floor, so that you will not need to ascend the stairs at all.

    “I shalt expect you by last train on Friday, in accordance with your
    letter: and, till then, I shalt say, in the words of the old song,
    'Oh for Friday nicht!  Friday's lang a-coming!'

    “Yours always,

    “ARTHUR FORESTER.

    “P.S.  Do you believe in Fate?”

This Postscript puzzled me sorely. “He is far too sensible a man,” I
thought, “to have become a Fatalist. And yet what else can he mean by
it?” And, as I folded up the letter and put it away, I inadvertently
repeated the words aloud. “Do you believe in Fate?”

The fair 'Incognita' turned her head quickly at the sudden question.
“No, I don't!” she said with a smile. “Do you?”

“I--I didn't mean to ask the question!” I stammered, a little taken
aback at having begun a conversation in so unconventional a fashion.

The lady's smile became a laugh--not a mocking laugh, but the laugh of a
happy child who is perfectly at her ease. “Didn't you?” she said. “Then
it was a case of what you Doctors call 'unconscious cerebration'?”

“I am no Doctor,” I replied. “Do I look so like one? Or what makes you
think it?”

She pointed to the book I had been reading, which was so lying that its
title, “Diseases of the Heart,” was plainly visible.

“One needn't be a Doctor,” I said, “to take an interest in medical
books. There's another class of readers, who are yet more deeply
interested--”

“You mean the Patients?” she interrupted, while a look of tender pity
gave new sweetness to her face. “But,” with an evident wish to avoid a
possibly painful topic, “one needn't be either, to take an interest in
books of Science. Which contain the greatest amount of Science, do you
think, the books, or the minds?”

“Rather a profound question for a lady!” I said to myself, holding, with
the conceit so natural to Man, that Woman's intellect is essentially
shallow. And I considered a minute before replying. “If you mean living
minds, I don't think it's possible to decide. There is so much written
Science that no living person has ever read: and there is so much
thought-out Science that hasn't yet been written. But, if you mean the
whole human race, then I think the minds have it: everything, recorded
in books, must have once been in some mind, you know.”

“Isn't that rather like one of the Rules in Algebra?” my Lady enquired.
(“Algebra too!” I thought with increasing wonder.) “I mean, if we
consider thoughts as factors, may we not say that the Least Common
Multiple of all the minds contains that of all the books; but not the
other way?”

“Certainly we may!” I replied, delighted with the illustration. “And
what a grand thing it would be,” I went on dreamily, thinking aloud
rather than talking, “if we could only apply that Rule to books! You
know, in finding the Least Common Multiple, we strike out a quantity
wherever it occurs, except in the term where it is raised to its highest
power. So we should have to erase every recorded thought, except in the
sentence where it is expressed with the greatest intensity.”

My Lady laughed merrily. “Some books would be reduced to blank paper,
I'm afraid!” she said.

“They would. Most libraries would be terribly diminished in bulk. But
just think what they would gain in quality!”

“When will it be done?” she eagerly asked. “If there's any chance of it
in my time, I think I'll leave off reading, and wait for it!”

“Well, perhaps in another thousand years or so--”

“Then there's no use waiting!”, said my Lady. “Let's sit down. Uggug, my
pet, come and sit by me!”

“Anywhere but by me!” growled the Sub-warden. “The little wretch always
manages to upset his coffee!”

I guessed at once (as perhaps the reader will also have guessed, if,
like myself, he is very clever at drawing conclusions) that my Lady was
the Sub-Warden's wife, and that Uggug (a hideous fat boy, about the same
age as Sylvie, with the expression of a prize-pig) was their son. Sylvie
and Bruno, with the Lord Chancellor, made up a party of seven.

{Image...A portable plunge-bath}

“And you actually got a plunge-bath every morning?” said the Sub-Warden,
seemingly in continuation of a conversation with the Professor. “Even at
the little roadside-inns?”

“Oh, certainly, certainly!” the Professor replied with a smile on his
jolly face. “Allow me to explain. It is, in fact, a very simple problem
in Hydrodynamics. (That means a combination of Water and Strength.)
If we take a plunge-bath, and a man of great strength (such as myself)
about to plunge into it, we have a perfect example of this science. I
am bound to admit,” the Professor continued, in a lower tone and with
downcast eyes, “that we need a man of remarkable strength. He must be
able to spring from the floor to about twice his own height, gradually
turning over as he rises, so as to come down again head first.”

“Why, you need a flea, not a man!” exclaimed the Sub-Warden.

“Pardon me,” said the Professor. “This particular kind of bath is
not adapted for a flea. Let us suppose,” he continued, folding his
table-napkin into a graceful festoon, “that this represents what is
perhaps the necessity of this Age--the Active Tourist's Portable Bath.
You may describe it briefly, if you like,” looking at the Chancellor,
“by the letters A.T.P.B.”

The Chancellor, much disconcerted at finding everybody looking at him,
could only murmur, in a shy whisper, “Precisely so!”

“One great advantage of this plunge-bath,” continued the Professor, “is
that it requires only half-a-gallon of water--”

“I don't call it a plunge-bath,” His Sub-Excellency remarked, “unless
your Active Tourist goes right under!”

“But he does go right under,” the old man gently replied. “The A.T.
hangs up the P. B. on a nail--thus. He then empties the water-jug into
it--places the empty jug below the bag--leaps into the air--descends
head-first into the bag--the water rises round him to the top of the
bag--and there you are!” he triumphantly concluded. “The A.T. is as much
under water as if he'd gone a mile or two down into the Atlantic!”

“And he's drowned, let us say, in about four minutes--”

“By no means!” the Professor answered with a proud smile. “After about
a minute, he quietly turns a tap at the lower end of the P. B.--all the
water runs back into the jug and there you are again!”

“But how in the world is he to get out of the bag again?”

“That, I take it,” said the Professor, “is the most beautiful part of
the whole invention. All the way up the P.B., inside, are loops for
the thumbs; so it's something like going up-stairs, only perhaps less
comfortable; and, by the time the A. T. has risen out of the bag, all
but his head, he's sure to topple over, one way or the other--the Law of
Gravity secures that. And there he is on the floor again!”

“A little bruised, perhaps?”

“Well, yes, a little bruised; but having had his plunge-bath: that's the
great thing.”

“Wonderful! It's almost beyond belief!” murmured the Sub-Warden. The
Professor took it as a compliment, and bowed with a gratified smile.

“Quite beyond belief!” my Lady added--meaning, no doubt, to be more
complimentary still. The Professor bowed, but he didn't smile this time.
“I can assure you,” he said earnestly, “that, provided the bath was
made, I used it every morning. I certainly ordered it--that I am clear
about--my only doubt is, whether the man ever finished making it. It's
difficult to remember, after so many years--”

At this moment the door, very slowly and creakingly, began to open, and
Sylvie and Bruno jumped up, and ran to meet the well-known footstep.






CHAPTER 3. BIRTHDAY-PRESENTS.

“It's my brother!” the Sub-warden exclaimed, in a warning whisper.
“Speak out, and be quick about it!”

The appeal was evidently addressed to the Lord Chancellor, who instantly
replied, in a shrill monotone, like a little boy repeating the alphabet,
“As I was remarking, your Sub-Excellency, this portentous movement--”

“You began too soon!” the other interrupted, scarcely able to restrain
himself to a whisper, so great was his excitement. “He couldn't have
heard you. Begin again!” “As I was remarking,” chanted the obedient Lord
Chancellor, “this portentous movement has already assumed the dimensions
of a Revolution!”

“And what are the dimensions of a Revolution?” The voice was genial and
mellow, and the face of the tall dignified old man, who had just entered
the room, leading Sylvie by the hand, and with Bruno riding triumphantly
on his shoulder, was too noble and gentle to have scared a less guilty
man: but the Lord Chancellor turned pale instantly, and could hardly
articulate the words “The dimensions your--your High Excellency?
I--I--scarcely comprehend!”

“Well, the length, breadth, and thickness, if you like it better!” And
the old man smiled, half-contemptuously.

The Lord Chancellor recovered himself with a great effort, and pointed
to the open window. “If your High Excellency will listen for a moment
to the shouts of the exasperated populace--” (“of the exasperated
populace!” the Sub-Warden repeated in a louder tone, as the Lord
Chancellor, being in a state of abject terror, had dropped almost into a
whisper) “--you will understand what it is they want.”

And at that moment there surged into the room a hoarse confused cry, in
which the only clearly audible words were “Less--bread--More--taxes!”
 The old man laughed heartily. “What in the world--” he was beginning:
but the Chancellor heard him not. “Some mistake!” he muttered, hurrying
to the window, from which he shortly returned with an air of relief.
“Now listen!” he exclaimed, holding up his hand impressively. And now
the words came quite distinctly, and with the regularity of the ticking
of a clock, “More--bread--Less taxes!'”

“More bread!” the Warden repeated in astonishment. “Why, the new
Government Bakery was opened only last week, and I gave orders to sell
the bread at cost-price during the present scarcity! What can they
expect more?”

“The Bakery's closed, y'reince!” the Chancellor said, more loudly and
clearly than he had spoken yet. He was emboldened by the consciousness
that here, at least, he had evidence to produce: and he placed in the
Warden's hands a few printed notices, that were lying ready, with some
open ledgers, on a side-table.

“Yes, yes, I see!” the Warden muttered, glancing carelessly through
them. “Order countermanded by my brother, and supposed to be my doing!
Rather sharp practice! It's all right!” he added in a louder tone. “My
name is signed to it: so I take it on myself. But what do they mean by
'Less Taxes'? How can they be less? I abolished the last of them a month
ago!”

“It's been put on again, y'reince, and by y'reince's own orders!”, and
other printed notices were submitted for inspection.

The Warden, whilst looking them over, glanced once or twice at the
Sub-Warden, who had seated himself before one of the open ledgers, and
was quite absorbed in adding it up; but he merely repeated “It's all
right. I accept it as my doing.”

“And they do say,” the Chancellor went on sheepishly--looking much
more like a convicted thief than an Officer of State, “that a change
of Government, by the abolition of the Sub-Warden---I mean,” he hastily
added, on seeing the Warden's look of astonishment, “the abolition of
the office of Sub-Warden, and giving the present holder the right to
act as Vice-Warden whenever the Warden is absent--would appease all this
seedling discontent I mean,” he added, glancing at a paper he held in
his hand, “all this seething discontent!”

“For fifteen years,” put in a deep but very harsh voice, “my husband has
been acting as Sub-Warden. It is too long! It is much too long!” My Lady
was a vast creature at all times: but, when she frowned and folded her
arms, as now, she looked more gigantic than ever, and made one try to
fancy what a haystack would look like, if out of temper.

“He would distinguish himself as a Vice!” my Lady proceeded, being far
too stupid to see the double meaning of her words. “There has been no
such Vice in Outland for many a long year, as he would be!”

“What course would you suggest, Sister?” the Warden mildly enquired.

My Lady stamped, which was undignified: and snorted, which was
ungraceful. “This is no jesting matter!” she bellowed.

“I will consult my brother,” said the Warden. “Brother!”

“--and seven makes a hundred and ninety-four, which is sixteen and
two-pence,” the Sub-Warden replied. “Put down two and carry sixteen.”

The Chancellor raised his hands and eyebrows, lost in admiration. “Such
a man of business!” he murmured.

“Brother, could I have a word with you in my Study?” the Warden said in
a louder tone. The Sub-Warden rose with alacrity, and the two left the
room together.

My Lady turned to the Professor, who had uncovered the urn, and was
taking its temperature with his pocket-thermometer. “Professor!” she
began, so loudly and suddenly that even Uggug, who had gone to sleep in
his chair, left off snoring and opened one eye. The Professor pocketed
his thermometer in a moment, clasped his hands, and put his head on one
side with a meek smile.

“You were teaching my son before breakfast, I believe?” my Lady loftily
remarked. “I hope he strikes you as having talent?”

“Oh, very much so indeed, my Lady!” the Professor hastily replied,
unconsciously rubbing his ear, while some painful recollection seemed
to cross his mind. “I was very forcibly struck by His Magnificence, I
assure you!”

“He is a charming boy!” my Lady exclaimed. “Even his snores are more
musical than those of other boys!”

If that were so, the Professor seemed to think, the snores of other boys
must be something too awful to be endured: but he was a cautious man,
and he said nothing.

“And he's so clever!” my Lady continued. “No one will enjoy your Lecture
more by the way, have you fixed the time for it yet? You've never given
one, you know: and it was promised years ago, before you--

“Yes, yes, my Lady, I know! Perhaps next Tuesday or Tuesday week--”

“That will do very well,” said my Lady, graciously. “Of course you will
let the Other Professor lecture as well?”

“I think not, my Lady?” the Professor said with some hesitation. “You
see, he always stands with his back to the audience. It does very well
for reciting; but for lecturing--”

“You are quite right,” said my Lady. “And, now I come to think of it,
there would hardly be time for more than one Lecture. And it will go off
all the better, if we begin with a Banquet, and a Fancy-dress Ball--”

“It will indeed!” the Professor cried, with enthusiasm.

“I shall come as a Grass-hopper,” my Lady calmly proceeded. “What shall
you come as, Professor?”

The Professor smiled feebly. “I shall come as--as early as I can, my
Lady!”

“You mustn't come in before the doors are opened,” said my Lady.

“I ca'n't,” said the Professor. “Excuse me a moment. As this is Lady
Sylvie's birthday, I would like to--” and he rushed away.

Bruno began feeling in his pockets, looking more and more melancholy
as he did so: then he put his thumb in his mouth, and considered for a
minute: then he quietly left the room.

He had hardly done so before the Professor was back again, quite out of
breath. “Wishing you many happy returns of the day, my dear child!” he
went on, addressing the smiling little girl, who had run to meet him.
“Allow me to give you a birthday-present. It's a second-hand pincushion,
my dear. And it only cost fourpence-halfpenny!”

“Thank you, it's very pretty!” And Sylvie rewarded the old man with a
hearty kiss.

“And the pins they gave me for nothing!” the Professor added in high
glee. “Fifteen of 'em, and only one bent!”

“I'll make the bent one into a hook!” said Sylvie. “To catch Bruno with,
when he runs away from his lessons!”

“You ca'n't guess what my present is!” said Uggug, who had taken the
butter-dish from the table, and was standing behind her, with a wicked
leer on his face.

“No, I ca'n't guess,” Sylvie said without looking up. She was still
examining the Professor's pincushion.

“It's this!” cried the bad boy, exultingly, as he emptied the dish over
her, and then, with a grin of delight at his own cleverness, looked
round for applause.

Sylvie coloured crimson, as she shook off the butter from her frock: but
she kept her lips tight shut, and walked away to the window, where she
stood looking out and trying to recover her temper.

Uggug's triumph was a very short one: the Sub-Warden had returned, just
in time to be a witness of his dear child's playfulness, and in another
moment a skilfully-applied box on the ear had changed the grin of
delight into a howl of pain.

“My darling!” cried his mother, enfolding him in her fat arms. “Did they
box his ears for nothing? A precious pet!”

“It's not for nothing!” growled the angry father. “Are you aware, Madam,
that I pay the house-bills, out of a fixed annual sum? The loss of all
that wasted butter falls on me! Do you hear, Madam!”

“Hold your tongue, Sir!” My Lady spoke very quietly--almost in a
whisper. But there was something in her look which silenced him. “Don't
you see it was only a joke? And a very clever one, too! He only meant
that he loved nobody but her! And, instead of being pleased with the
compliment, the spiteful little thing has gone away in a huff!”

The Sub-Warden was a very good hand at changing a subject. He walked
across to the window. “My dear,” he said, “is that a pig that I see down
below, rooting about among your flower-beds?”

“A pig!” shrieked my Lady, rushing madly to the window, and almost
pushing her husband out, in her anxiety to see for herself. “Whose pig
is it? How did it get in? Where's that crazy Gardener gone?”

At this moment Bruno re-entered the room, and passing Uggug (who was
blubbering his loudest, in the hope of attracting notice) as if he was
quite used to that sort of thing, he ran up to Sylvie and threw his arms
round her. “I went to my toy-cupboard,” he said with a very sorrowful
face, “to see if there were somefin fit for a present for oo! And there
isn't nuffin! They's all broken, every one! And I haven't got no money
left, to buy oo a birthday-present! And I ca'n't give oo nuffin but
this!” (“This” was a very earnest hug and a kiss.)

“Oh, thank you, darling!” cried Sylvie. “I like your present best of
all!” (But if so, why did she give it back so quickly?)

His Sub-Excellency turned and patted the two children on the head with
his long lean hands. “Go away, dears!” he said. “There's business to
talk over.”

Sylvie and Bruno went away hand in hand: but, on reaching the door,
Sylvie came back again and went up to Uggug timidly. “I don't mind about
the butter,” she said, “and I--I'm sorry he hurt you!” And she tried to
shake hands with the little ruffian: but Uggug only blubbered louder,
and wouldn't make friends. Sylvie left the room with a sigh.

The Sub-Warden glared angrily at his weeping son. “Leave the room,
Sirrah!” he said, as loud as he dared. His wife was still leaning out of
the window, and kept repeating “I ca'n't see that pig! Where is it?”

“It's moved to the right now it's gone a little to the left,” said the
Sub-Warden: but he had his back to the window, and was making signals to
the Lord Chancellor, pointing to Uggug and the door, with many a cunning
nod and wink.

{Image...Removal of Uggug}

The Chancellor caught his meaning at last, and, crossing the room, took
that interesting child by the ear the next moment he and Uggug were out
of the room, and the door shut behind them: but not before one piercing
yell had rung through the room, and reached the ears of the fond mother.

“What is that hideous noise?” she fiercely asked, turning upon her
startled husband.

“It's some hyaena--or other,” replied the Sub-Warden, looking vaguely up
to the ceiling, as if that was where they usually were to be found. “Let
us to business, my dear. Here comes the Warden.” And he picked up from
the floor a wandering scrap of manuscript, on which I just caught the
words 'after which Election duly holden the said Sibimet and Tabikat
his wife may at their pleasure assume Imperial--' before, with a guilty
look, he crumpled it up in his hand.






CHAPTER 4. A CUNNING CONSPIRACY.

The Warden entered at this moment: and close behind him came the Lord
Chancellor, a little flushed and out of breath, and adjusting his wig,
which appeared to have been dragged partly off his head.

“But where is my precious child?” my Lady enquired, as the four took
their seats at the small side-table devoted to ledgers and bundles and
bills.

“He left the room a few minutes ago with the Lord Chancellor,” the
Sub-Warden briefly explained.

“Ah!” said my Lady, graciously smiling on that high official. “Your
Lordship has a very taking way with children! I doubt if any one could
gain the ear of my darling Uggug so quickly as you can!” For an entirely
stupid woman, my Lady's remarks were curiously full of meaning, of which
she herself was wholly unconscious.

The Chancellor bowed, but with a very uneasy air. “I think the Warden
was about to speak,” he remarked, evidently anxious to change the
subject.

But my Lady would not be checked. “He is a clever boy,” she continued
with enthusiasm, “but he needs a man like your Lordship to draw him
out!”

The Chancellor bit his lip, and was silent. He evidently feared that,
stupid as she looked, she understood what she said this time, and was
having a joke at his expense. He might have spared himself all anxiety:
whatever accidental meaning her words might have, she herself never
meant anything at all.

“It is all settled!” the Warden announced, wasting no time over
preliminaries. “The Sub-Wardenship is abolished, and my brother is
appointed to act as Vice-Warden whenever I am absent. So, as I am going
abroad for a while, he will enter on his new duties at once.”

“And there will really be a Vice after all?” my Lady enquired.

“I hope so!” the Warden smilingly replied.

My Lady looked much pleased, and tried to clap her hands: but you might
as well have knocked two feather-beds together, for any noise it made.
“When my husband is Vice,” she said, “it will be the same as if we had a
hundred Vices!”

“Hear, hear!” cried the Sub-Warden.

“You seem to think it very remarkable,” my Lady remarked with some
severity, “that your wife should speak the truth!”

“No, not remarkable at all!” her husband anxiously explained. “Nothing
is remarkable that you say, sweet one!”

My Lady smiled approval of the sentiment, and went on. “And am I
Vice-Wardeness?”

“If you choose to use that title,” said the Warden: “but 'Your
Excellency' will be the proper style of address. And I trust that both
'His Excellency' and 'Her Excellency' will observe the Agreement I have
drawn up. The provision I am most anxious about is this.” He unrolled a
large parchment scroll, and read aloud the words “'item, that we will be
kind to the poor.' The Chancellor worded it for me,” he added, glancing
at that great Functionary. “I suppose, now, that word 'item' has some
deep legal meaning?”

“Undoubtedly!” replied the Chancellor, as articulately as he could with
a pen between his lips. He was nervously rolling and unrolling several
other scrolls, and making room among them for the one the Warden had
just handed to him. “These are merely the rough copies,” he explained:
“and, as soon as I have put in the final corrections--” making a great
commotion among the different parchments, “--a semi-colon or two that I
have accidentally omitted--” here he darted about, pen in hand, from one
part of the scroll to another, spreading sheets of blotting-paper over
his corrections, “all will be ready for signing.”

“Should it not be read out, first?” my Lady enquired.

“No need, no need!” the Sub-Warden and the Chancellor exclaimed at the
same moment, with feverish eagerness.

“No need at all,” the Warden gently assented. “Your husband and I have
gone through it together. It provides that he shall exercise the full
authority of Warden, and shall have the disposal of the annual revenue
attached to the office, until my return, or, failing that, until Bruno
comes of age: and that he shall then hand over, to myself or to Bruno as
the case may be, the Wardenship, the unspent revenue, and the
contents of the Treasury, which are to be preserved, intact, under his
guardianship.”

All this time the Sub-Warden was busy, with the Chancellor's help,
shifting the papers from side to side, and pointing out to the Warden
the place whew he was to sign. He then signed it himself, and my Lady
and the Chancellor added their names as witnesses.

“Short partings are best,” said the Warden. “All is ready for my
journey. My children are waiting below to see me off” He gravely kissed
my Lady, shook hands with his brother and the Chancellor, and left the
room.

{Image...'What a game!'}

The three waited in silence till the sound of wheels announced that the
Warden was out of hearing: then, to my surprise, they broke into peals
of uncontrollable laughter.

“What a game, oh, what a game!” cried the Chancellor. And he and the
Vice-Warden joined hands, and skipped wildly about the room. My Lady was
too dignified to skip, but she laughed like the neighing of a horse, and
waved her handkerchief above her head: it was clear to her very limited
understanding that something very clever had been done, but what it was
she had yet to learn.

“You said I should hear all about it when the Warden had gone,” she
remarked, as soon as she could make herself heard.

“And so you shall, Tabby!” her husband graciously replied, as he removed
the blotting-paper, and showed the two parchments lying side by side.
“This is the one he read but didn't sign: and this is the one he signed
but didn't read! You see it was all covered up, except the place for
signing the names--”

“Yes, yes!” my Lady interrupted eagerly, and began comparing the two
Agreements.

“'Item, that he shall exercise the authority of Warden, in the Warden's
absence.' Why, that's been changed into 'shall be absolute governor
for life, with the title of Emperor, if elected to that office by the
people.' What! Are you Emperor, darling?”

“Not yet, dear,” the Vice-Warden replied. “It won't do to let this paper
be seen, just at present. All in good time.”

My Lady nodded, and read on. “'Item, that we will be kind to the poor.'
Why, that's omitted altogether!”

“Course it is!” said her husband. “We're not going to bother about the
wretches!”

“Good,” said my Lady, with emphasis, and read on again. “'Item, that the
contents of the Treasury be preserved intact.' Why, that's altered into
'shall be at the absolute disposal of the Vice-Warden'! Well, Sibby,
that was a clever trick! All the Jewels, only think! May I go and put
them on directly?”

“Well, not just yet, Lovey,” her husband uneasily replied. “You see the
public mind isn't quite ripe for it yet. We must feel our way. Of course
we'll have the coach-and-four out, at once. And I'll take the title of
Emperor, as soon as we can safely hold an Election. But they'll hardly
stand our using the Jewels, as long as they know the Warden's alive. We
must spread a report of his death. A little Conspiracy--”

“A Conspiracy!” cried the delighted lady, clapping her hands. “Of all
things, I do like a Conspiracy! It's so interesting!”

The Vice-Warden and the Chancellor interchanged a wink or two. “Let
her conspire to her heart's content!” the cunning Chancellor whispered.
“It'll do no harm!”

“And when will the Conspiracy--”

“Hist!', her husband hastily interrupted her, as the door opened, and
Sylvie and Bruno came in, with their arms twined lovingly round each
other--Bruno sobbing convulsively, with his face hidden on his sister's
shoulder, and Sylvie more grave and quiet, but with tears streaming down
her cheeks.

“Mustn't cry like that!” the Vice-Warden said sharply, but without any
effect on the weeping children. “Cheer 'em up a bit!” he hinted to my
Lady.

“Cake!” my Lady muttered to herself with great decision, crossing the
room and opening a cupboard, from which she presently returned with two
slices of plum-cake. “Eat, and don't cry!” were her short and simple
orders: and the poor children sat down side by side, but seemed in no
mood for eating.

For the second time the door opened--or rather was burst open, this
time, as Uggug rushed violently into the room, shouting “that old
Beggars come again!”

“He's not to have any food--” the Vice-warden was beginning, but the
Chancellor interrupted him. “It's all right,” he said, in a low voice:
“the servants have their orders.”

“He's just under here,” said Uggug, who had gone to the window, and was
looking down into the court-yard.

“Where, my darling?” said his fond mother, flinging her arms round the
neck of the little monster. All of us (except Sylvie and Bruno, who
took no notice of what was going on) followed her to the window. The old
Beggar looked up at us with hungry eyes. “Only a crust of bread, your
Highness!” he pleaded.

{Image...'Drink this!'}

He was a fine old man, but looked sadly ill and worn. “A crust of bread
is what I crave!” he repeated. “A single crust, and a little water!”

“Here's some water, drink this!”

Uggug bellowed, emptying a jug of water over his head.

“Well done, my boy!” cried the Vice-Warden.

“That's the way to settle such folk!”

“Clever boy!”, the Wardeness chimed in. “Hasn't he good spirits?”

“Take a stick to him!” shouted the Vice-Warden, as the old Beggar shook
the water from his ragged cloak, and again gazed meekly upwards.

“Take a red-hot poker to him!” my Lady again chimed in.

Possibly there was no red-hot poker handy: but some sticks were
forthcoming in a moment, and threatening faces surrounded the poor old
wanderer, who waved them back with quiet dignity. “No need to break my
old bones,” he said. “I am going. Not even a crust!”

“Poor, poor old man!” exclaimed a little voice at my side, half choked
with sobs. Bruno was at the window, trying to throw out his slice of
plum-cake, but Sylvie held him back.

“He shalt have my cake!” Bruno cried, passionately struggling out of
Sylvie's arms.

“Yes, yes, darling!” Sylvie gently pleaded. “But don't throw it out!
He's gone away, don't you see? Let's go after him.” And she led him
out of the room, unnoticed by the rest of the party, who were wholly
absorbed in watching the old Beggar.

The Conspirators returned to their seats, and continued their
conversation in an undertone, so as not to be heard by Uggug, who was
still standing at the window.

“By the way, there was something about Bruno succeeding to the
Wrardenship,” said my Lady. “How does that stand in the new Agreement?”

The Chancellor chuckled. “Just the same, word for word,” he said, “with
one exception, my Lady. Instead of 'Bruno,' I've taken the liberty to
put in--” he dropped his voice to a whisper, “to put in 'Uggug,' you
know!”

“Uggug, indeed!” I exclaimed, in a burst of indignation I could no
longer control. To bring out even that one word seemed a gigantic
effort: but, the cry once uttered, all effort ceased at once: a sudden
gust swept away the whole scene, and I found myself sitting up, staring
at the young lady in the opposite corner of the carriage, who had now
thrown back her veil, and was looking at me with an expression of amused
surprise.






CHAPTER 5. A BEGGAR'S PALACE.

That I had said something, in the act of waking, I felt sure: the hoarse
stifled cry was still ringing in my ears, even if the startled look
of my fellow-traveler had not been evidence enough: but what could I
possibly say by way of apology?

“I hope I didn't frighten you?” I stammered out at last. “I have no idea
what I said. I was dreaming.”

“You said 'Uggug indeed!'” the young lady replied, with quivering lips
that would curve themselves into a smile, in spite of all her efforts to
look grave. “At least--you didn't say it--you shouted it!”

“I'm very sorry,” was all I could say, feeling very penitent and
helpless. “She has Sylvie's eyes!” I thought to myself, half-doubting
whether, even now, I were fairly awake. “And that sweet look of innocent
wonder is all Sylvie's too. But Sylvie hasn't got that calm resolute
mouth nor that far-away look of dreamy sadness, like one that has had
some deep sorrow, very long ago--” And the thick-coming fancies almost
prevented my hearing the lady's next words.

“If you had had a 'Shilling Dreadful' in your hand,” she proceeded,
“something about Ghosts or Dynamite or Midnight Murder--one could
understand it: those things aren't worth the shilling, unless they give
one a Nightmare. But really--with only a medical treatise, you know--”
 and she glanced, with a pretty shrug of contempt, at the book over which
I had fallen asleep.

Her friendliness, and utter unreserve, took me aback for a moment; yet
there was no touch of forwardness, or boldness, about the child
for child, almost, she seemed to be: I guessed her at scarcely over
twenty--all was the innocent frankness of some angelic visitant, new
to the ways of earth and the conventionalisms or, if you will, the
barbarisms--of Society. “Even so,” I mused, “will Sylvie look and speak,
in another ten years.”

“You don't care for Ghosts, then,” I ventured to suggest, “unless they
are really terrifying?”

“Quite so,” the lady assented. “The regular Railway-Ghosts--I mean the
Ghosts of ordinary Railway-literature--are very poor affairs. I feel
inclined to say, with Alexander Selkirk, 'Their tameness is shocking to
me'! And they never do any Midnight Murders. They couldn't 'welter in
gore,' to save their lives!”

“'Weltering in gore' is a very expressive phrase, certainly. Can it be
done in any fluid, I wonder?”

“I think not,” the lady readily replied--quite as if she had thought it
out, long ago. “It has to be something thick. For instance, you might
welter in bread-sauce. That, being white, would be more suitable for a
Ghost, supposing it wished to welter!”

“You have a real good terrifying Ghost in that book?” I hinted.

“How could you guess?” she exclaimed with the most engaging frankness,
and placed the volume in my hands. I opened it eagerly, with a not
unpleasant thrill (like what a good ghost-story gives one) at the
'uncanny' coincidence of my having so unexpectedly divined the subject
of her studies.

It was a book of Domestic Cookery, open at the article Bread Sauce.'

I returned the book, looking, I suppose, a little blank, as the lady
laughed merrily at my discomfiture. “It's far more exciting than some
of the modern ghosts, I assure you! Now there was a Ghost last month--I
don't mean a real Ghost in in Supernature--but in a Magazine. It was
a perfectly flavourless Ghost. It wouldn't have frightened a mouse! It
wasn't a Ghost that one would even offer a chair to!”

“Three score years and ten, baldness, and spectacles, have their
advantages after all!”, I said to myself. “Instead of a bashful youth
and maiden, gasping out monosyllables at awful intervals, here we have
an old man and a child, quite at their ease, talking as if they had
known each other for years! Then you think,” I continued aloud, “that
we ought sometimes to ask a Ghost to sit down? But have we any authority
for it? In Shakespeare, for instance--there are plenty of ghosts
there--does Shakespeare ever give the stage-direction 'hands chair to
Ghost'?”

The lady looked puzzled and thoughtful for a moment: then she almost
clapped her hands. “Yes, yes, he does!” she cried. “He makes Hamlet say
'Rest, rest, perturbed Spirit!”'

“And that, I suppose, means an easy-chair?”

“An American rocking-chair, I think--”

“Fayfield Junction, my Lady, change for Elveston!” the guard announced,
flinging open the door of the carriage: and we soon found ourselves,
with all our portable property around us, on the platform.

The accommodation, provided for passengers waiting at this Junction, was
distinctly inadequate--a single wooden bench, apparently intended for
three sitters only: and even this was already partially occupied by
a very old man, in a smock frock, who sat, with rounded shoulders and
drooping head, and with hands clasped on the top of his stick so as to
make a sort of pillow for that wrinkled face with its look of patient
weariness.

“Come, you be off!” the Station-master roughly accosted the poor old
man. “You be off, and make way for your betters! This way, my Lady!” he
added in a perfectly different tone. “If your Ladyship will take a seat,
the train will be up in a few minutes.” The cringing servility of his
manner was due, no doubt, to the address legible on the pile of luggage,
which announced their owner to be “Lady Muriel Orme, passenger to
Elveston, via Fayfield Junction.”

As I watched the old man slowly rise to his feet, and hobble a few paces
down the platform, the lines came to my lips:--


    “From sackcloth couch the Monk arose,
    With toil his stiffen'd limbs he rear'd;
    A hundred years had flung their snows
    On his thin locks and floating beard.”

{Image...'Come, you be off!'}

But the lady scarcely noticed the little incident. After one glance
at the 'banished man,' who stood tremulously leaning on his stick, she
turned to me. “This is not an American rocking-chair, by any means!
Yet may I say,” slightly changing her place, so as to make room for me
beside her, “may I say, in Hamlet's words, 'Rest, rest--'” she broke off
with a silvery laugh.

“--perturbed Spirit!”' I finished the sentence for her. “Yes, that
describes a railway-traveler exactly! And here is an instance of it,” I
added, as the tiny local train drew up alongside the platform, and the
porters bustled about, opening carriage-doors--one of them helping the
poor old man to hoist himself into a third-class carriage, while another
of them obsequiously conducted the lady and myself into a first-class.

She paused, before following him, to watch the progress of the other
passenger. “Poor old man!” she said. “How weak and ill he looks! It was
a shame to let him be turned away like that. I'm very sorry--” At this
moment it dawned on me that these words were not addressed to me, but
that she was unconsciously thinking aloud. I moved away a few steps,
and waited to follow her into the carriage, where I resumed the
conversation.

“Shakespeare must have traveled by rail, if only in a dream: 'perturbed
Spirit' is such a happy phrase.”

“'Perturbed' referring, no doubt,” she rejoined, “to the sensational
booklets peculiar to the Rail. If Steam has done nothing else, it has at
least added a whole new Species to English Literature!”

“No doubt of it,” I echoed. “The true origin of all our medical
books--and all our cookery-books--”

“No, no!” she broke in merrily. “I didn't mean our Literature! We are
quite abnormal. But the booklets--the little thrilling romances, where
the Murder comes at page fifteen, and the Wedding at page forty--surely
they are due to Steam?”

“And when we travel by Electricity if I may venture to develop your
theory we shall have leaflets instead of booklets, and the Murder and
the Wedding will come on the same page.”

“A development worthy of Darwin!”, the lady exclaimed enthusiastically.
“Only you reverse his theory. Instead of developing a mouse into an
elephant, you would develop an elephant into a mouse!” But here we
plunged into a tunnel, and I leaned back and closed my eyes for a
moment, trying to recall a few of the incidents of my recent dream.

“I thought I saw--” I murmured sleepily: and then the phrase insisted
on conjugating itself, and ran into “you thought you saw--he thought he
saw--” and then it suddenly went off into a song:--


    “He thought he saw an Elephant,
    That practised on a fife:
    He looked again, and found it was
    A letter from his wife.
    'At length I realise,' he said,
    “The bitterness of Life!'”

And what a wild being it was who sang these wild words! A Gardener
he seemed to be yet surely a mad one, by the way he brandished his
rake--madder, by the way he broke, ever and anon, into a frantic
jig--maddest of all, by the shriek in which he brought out the last
words of the stanza!

{Image....The gardener}

It was so far a description of himself that he had the feet of an
Elephant: but the rest of him was skin and bone: and the wisps of
loose straw, that bristled all about him, suggested that he had been
originally stuffed with it, and that nearly all the stuffing had come
out.

Sylvie and Bruno waited patiently till the end of the first verse. Then
Sylvie advanced alone (Bruno having suddenly turned shy) and timidly
introduced herself with the words “Please, I'm Sylvie!”

“And who's that other thing?', said the Gardener.

“What thing?” said Sylvie, looking round. “Oh, that's Bruno. He's my
brother.”

“Was he your brother yesterday?” the Gardener anxiously enquired.

“Course I were!” cried Bruno, who had gradually crept nearer, and
didn't at all like being talked about without having his share in the
conversation.

“Ah, well!” the Gardener said with a kind of groan. “Things change so,
here. Whenever I look again, it's sure to be something different! Yet I
does my duty! I gets up wriggle-early at five--”

“If I was oo,” said Bruno, “I wouldn't wriggle so early. It's as bad as
being a worm!” he added, in an undertone to Sylvie.

“But you shouldn't be lazy in the morning, Bruno,” said Sylvie.
“Remember, it's the early bird that picks up the worm!”

“It may, if it likes!” Bruno said with a slight yawn. “I don't like
eating worms, one bit. I always stop in bed till the early bird has
picked them up!”

“I wonder you've the face to tell me such fibs!” cried the Gardener.

To which Bruno wisely replied “Oo don't want a face to tell fibs
wiz--only a mouf.”

Sylvie discreetly changed the subject. “And did you plant all these
flowers?” she said.

“What a lovely garden you've made! Do you know, I'd like to live here
always!”

“In the winter-nights--” the Gardener was beginning.

“But I'd nearly forgotten what we came about!” Sylvie interrupted.
“Would you please let us through into the road? There's a poor old
beggar just gone out--and he's very hungry--and Bruno wants to give him
his cake, you know!”

“It's as much as my place is worth!” the Gardener muttered, taking a key
from his pocket, and beginning to unlock a door in the garden-wall.

“How much are it wurf?” Bruno innocently enquired.

But the Gardener only grinned. “That's a secret!” he said. “Mind you
come back quick!” he called after the children, as they passed out into
the road. I had just time to follow them, before he shut the door again.

We hurried down the road, and very soon caught sight of the old Beggar,
about a quarter of a mile ahead of us, and the children at once set off
running to overtake him.

Lightly and swiftly they skimmed over the ground, and I could not in
the least understand how it was I kept up with them so easily. But the
unsolved problem did not worry me so much as at another time it might
have done, there were so many other things to attend to.

The old Beggar must have been very deaf, as he paid no attention
whatever to Bruno's eager shouting, but trudged wearily on, never
pausing until the child got in front of him and held up the slice of
cake. The poor little fellow was quite out of breath, and could only
utter the one word “Cake!” not with the gloomy decision with which
Her Excellency had so lately pronounced it, but with a sweet childish
timidity, looking up into the old man's face with eyes that loved 'all
things both great and small.'

The old man snatched it from him, and devoured it greedily, as some
hungry wild beast might have done, but never a word of thanks did he
give his little benefactor--only growled “More, more!” and glared at the
half-frightened children.

“There is no more!”, Sylvie said with tears in her eyes. “I'd eaten
mine. It was a shame to let you be turned away like that. I'm very
sorry--”

I lost the rest of the sentence, for my mind had recurred, with a great
shock of surprise, to Lady Muriel Orme, who had so lately uttered
these very words of Sylvie's--yes, and in Sylvie's own voice, and with
Sylvie's gentle pleading eyes!

“Follow me!” were the next words I heard, as the old man waved his hand,
with a dignified grace that ill suited his ragged dress, over a bush,
that stood by the road side, which began instantly to sink into the
earth. At another time I might have doubted the evidence of my eyes,
or at least have felt some astonishment: but, in this strange scene, my
whole being seemed absorbed in strong curiosity as to what would happen
next.

When the bush had sunk quite out of our sight, marble steps were seen,
leading downwards into darkness. The old man led the way, and we eagerly
followed.

The staircase was so dark, at first, that I could only just see the
forms of the children, as, hand-in-hand, they groped their way down
after their guide: but it got lighter every moment, with a strange
silvery brightness, that seemed to exist in the air, as there were no
lamps visible; and, when at last we reached a level floor, the room, in
which we found ourselves, was almost as light as day.

It was eight-sided, having in each angle a slender pillar, round which
silken draperies were twined. The wall between the pillars was entirely
covered, to the height of six or seven feet, with creepers, from which
hung quantities of ripe fruit and of brilliant flowers, that almost hid
the leaves. In another place, perchance, I might have wondered to see
fruit and flowers growing together: here, my chief wonder was that
neither fruit nor flowers were such as I had ever seen before. Higher
up, each wall contained a circular window of coloured glass; and over
all was an arched roof, that seemed to be spangled all over with jewels.

With hardly less wonder, I turned this way and that, trying to make
out how in the world we had come in: for there was no door: and all the
walls were thickly covered with the lovely creepers.

“We are safe here, my darlings!” said the old man, laying a hand on
Sylvie's shoulder, and bending down to kiss her. Sylvie drew back
hastily, with an offended air: but in another moment, with a glad cry of
“Why, it's Father!”, she had run into his arms.

{Image...A beggar's palace}

“Father! Father!” Bruno repeated: and, while the happy children were
being hugged and kissed, I could but rub my eyes and say “Where, then,
are the rags gone to?”; for the old man was now dressed in royal robes
that glittered with jewels and gold embroidery, and wore a circlet of
gold around his head.






CHAPTER 6. THE MAGIC LOCKET.

“Where are we, father?” Sylvie whispered, with her arms twined closely
around the old man's neck, and with her rosy cheek lovingly pressed to
his.

“In Elfland, darling. It's one of the provinces of Fairyland.”

“But I thought Elfland was ever so far from Outland: and we've come such
a tiny little way!”

“You came by the Royal Road, sweet one. Only those of royal blood can
travel along it: but you've been royal ever since I was made King of
Elfland that's nearly a month ago. They sent two ambassadors, to make
sure that their invitation to me, to be their new King, should reach me.
One was a Prince; so he was able to come by the Royal Road, and to come
invisibly to all but me: the other was a Baron; so he had to come by the
common road, and I dare say he hasn't even arrived yet.”

“Then how far have we come?” Sylvie enquired.

“Just a thousand miles, sweet one, since the Gardener unlocked that door
for you.”

“A thousand miles!” Bruno repeated. “And may I eat one?”

“Eat a mile, little rogue?”

“No,” said Bruno. “I mean may I eat one of that fruits?”

“Yes, child,” said his father: “and then you'll find out what Pleasure
is like--the Pleasure we all seek so madly, and enjoy so mournfully!”

Bruno ran eagerly to the wall, and picked a fruit that was shaped
something like a banana, but had the colour of a strawberry.

He ate it with beaming looks, that became gradually more gloomy, and
were very blank indeed by the time he had finished.

“It hasn't got no taste at all!” he complained. “I couldn't feel nuffin
in my mouf! It's a--what's that hard word, Sylvie?”

“It was a Phlizz,” Sylvie gravely replied. “Are they all like that,
father?”

“They're all like that to you, darling, because you don't belong to
Elfland--yet. But to me they are real.”

Bruno looked puzzled. “I'll try anuvver kind of fruits!” he said, and
jumped down off the King's knee. “There's some lovely striped ones, just
like a rainbow!” And off he ran.

Meanwhile the Fairy-King and Sylvie were talking together, but in such
low tones that I could not catch the words: so I followed Bruno, who
was picking and eating other kinds of fruit, in the vain hope of finding
some that had a taste. I tried to pick so me myself--but it was like
grasping air, and I soon gave up the attempt and returned to Sylvie.

“Look well at it, my darling,” the old man was saying, “and tell me how
you like it.”

“'It's just lovely,” cried Sylvie, delightedly. “Bruno, come and
look!” And she held up, so that he might see the light through it, a
heart-shaped Locket, apparently cut out of a single jewel, of a rich
blue colour, with a slender gold chain attached to it.

“It are welly pretty,” Bruno more soberly remarked: and he began
spelling out some words inscribed on it. “All--will--love--Sylvie,” he
made them out at last. “And so they doos!” he cried, clasping his arms
round her neck. “Everybody loves Sylvie!”

“But we love her best, don't we, Bruno?” said the old King, as he took
possession of the Locket. “Now, Sylvie, look at this.” And he showed
her, lying on the palm of his hand, a Locket of a deep crimson colour,
the same shape as the blue one and, like it, attached to a slender
golden chain.

“Lovelier and lovelier!” exclaimed Sylvie, clasping her hands in
ecstasy. “Look, Bruno!”

“And there's words on this one, too,” said Bruno.
“Sylvie--will--love--all.”

“Now you see the difference,” said the old man: “different colours and
different words.”

“Choose one of them, darling. I'll give you which ever you like best.”

{Image...The crimson locket}

Sylvie whispered the words, several times over, with a thoughtful smile,
and then made her decision. “It's very nice to be loved,” she said: “but
it's nicer to love other people! May I have the red one, Father?”

The old man said nothing: but I could see his eyes fill with tears, as
he bent his head and pressed his lips to her forehead in a long loving
kiss. Then he undid the chain, and showed her how to fasten it round her
neck, and to hide it away under the edge of her frock. “It's for you
to keep you know he said in a low voice, not for other people to see.
You'll remember how to use it?”

“Yes, I'll remember,” said Sylvie.

“And now darlings it's time for you to go back or they'll be missing you
and then that poor Gardener will get into trouble!”

Once more a feeling of wonder rose in my mind as to how in the world we
were to get back again--since I took it for granted that wherever the
children went I was to go--but no shadow of doubt seemed to cross
their minds as they hugged and kissed him murmuring over and over again
“Good-bye darling Father!” And then suddenly and swiftly the darkness
of midnight seemed to close in upon us and through the darkness harshly
rang a strange wild song:--


    He thought he saw a Buffalo
    Upon the chimney-piece:
    He looked again, and found it was
    His Sister's Husband's Niece.
    'Unless you leave this house,' he said,
    'I'll send for the Police!'

{Image...'He thought he saw a buffalo'}

“That was me!” he added, looking out at us, through the half-opened
door, as we stood waiting in the road.' “And that's what I'd have
done--as sure as potatoes aren't radishes--if she hadn't have tooken
herself off! But I always loves my pay-rints like anything.”

“Who are oor pay-rints?” said Bruno.

“Them as pay rint for me, a course!” the Gardener replied. “You can come
in now, if you like.”

He flung the door open as he spoke, and we got out, a little dazzled
and stupefied (at least I felt so) at the sudden transition from
the half-darkness of the railway-carriage to the brilliantly-lighted
platform of Elveston Station.

A footman, in a handsome livery, came forwards and respectfully touched
his hat. “The carriage is here, my Lady,” he said, taking from her
the wraps and small articles she was carrying: and Lady Muriel, after
shaking hands and bidding me “Good-night!” with a pleasant smile,
followed him.

It was with a somewhat blank and lonely feeling that I betook myself to
the van from which the luggage was being taken out: and, after giving
directions to have my boxes sent after me, I made my way on foot to
Arthur's lodgings, and soon lost my lonely feeling in the hearty welcome
my old friend gave me, and the cozy warmth and cheerful light of the
little sitting-room into which he led me.

“Little, as you see, but quite enough for us two. Now, take the
easy-chair, old fellow, and let's have another look at you! Well, you
do look a bit pulled down!” and he put on a solemn professional air.
“I prescribe Ozone, quant. suff. Social dissipation, fiant pilulae quam
plurimae: to be taken, feasting, three times a day!”

“But, Doctor!” I remonstrated. “Society doesn't 'receive' three times a
day!”

“That's all you know about it!” the young Doctor gaily replied. “At
home, lawn-tennis, 3 P.M. At home, kettledrum, 5 P.M. At home, music
(Elveston doesn't give dinners), 8 P.M. Carriages at 10. There you are!”

It sounded very pleasant, I was obliged to admit. “And I know some
of the lady-society already,” I added. “One of them came in the same
carriage with me.”

“What was she like? Then perhaps I can identify her.”

“The name was Lady Muriel Orme. As to what she was like--well, I thought
her very beautiful. Do you know her?”

“Yes--I do know her.” And the grave Doctor coloured slightly as he added
“Yes, I agree with you. She is beautiful.”

“I quite lost my heart to her!” I went on mischievously. “We talked--”

“Have some supper!” Arthur interrupted with an air of relief, as the
maid entered with the tray. And he steadily resisted all my attempts to
return to the subject of Lady Muriel until the evening had almost worn
itself away. Then, as we sat gazing into the fire, and conversation was
lapsing into silence, he made a hurried confession.

“I hadn't meant to tell you anything about her,” he said (naming no
names, as if there were only one 'she' in the world!) “till you had
seen more of her, and formed your own judgment of her: but somehow you
surprised it out of me. And I've not breathed a word of it to any one
else. But I can trust you with a secret, old friend! Yes! It's true of
me, what I suppose you said in jest.

“In the merest jest, believe me!” I said earnestly. “Why, man, I'm three
times her age! But if she's your choice, then I'm sure she's all that is
good and--”

“--and sweet,” Arthur went on, “and pure, and self-denying, and
true-hearted, and--” he broke off hastily, as if he could not trust
himself to say more on a subject so sacred and so precious. Silence
followed: and I leaned back drowsily in my easy-chair, filled with
bright and beautiful imaginings of Arthur and his lady-love, and of all
the peace and happiness in store for them.

I pictured them to myself walking together, lingeringly and lovingly,
under arching trees, in a sweet garden of their own, and welcomed back
by their faithful gardener, on their return from some brief excursion.

It seemed natural enough that the gardener should be filled with
exuberant delight at the return of so gracious a master and mistress and
how strangely childlike they looked! I could have taken them for Sylvie
and Bruno less natural that he should show it by such wild dances, such
crazy songs!


    “He thought he saw a Rattlesnake
    That questioned him in Greek:
    He looked again, and found it was
    The Middle of Next Week.
    'The one thing I regret,' he said,
    'Is that it cannot speak!”

--least natural of all that the Vice-Warden and 'my Lady' should be
standing close beside me, discussing an open letter, which had just been
handed to him by the Professor, who stood, meekly waiting, a few yards
off.

“If it were not for those two brats,” I heard him mutter, glancing
savagely at Sylvie and Bruno, who were courteously listening to the
Gardener's song, “there would be no difficulty whatever.”

“Let's hear that bit of the letter again,” said my Lady. And the
Vice-Warden read aloud:--

“--and we therefore entreat you graciously to accept the Kingship, to
which you have been unanimously elected by the Council of Elfland: and
that you will allow your son Bruno of whose goodness, cleverness, and
beauty, reports have reached us--to be regarded as Heir-Apparent.”

“But what's the difficulty?” said my Lady.

“Why, don't you see? The Ambassador, that brought this, is waiting in
the house: and he's sure to see Sylvie and Bruno: and then, when he sees
Uggug, and remembers all that about 'goodness, cleverness, and beauty,'
why, he's sure to--”

“And where will you find a better boy than Uggug?” my Lady indignantly
interrupted. “Or a wittier, or a lovelier?”

To all of which the Vice-Warden simply replied “Don't you be a great
blethering goose! Our only chance is to keep those two brats out of
sight. If you can manage that, you may leave the rest to me. I'll make
him believe Uggug to be a model of cleverness and all that.”

“We must change his name to Bruno, of course?” said my Lady.

The Vice-Warden rubbed his chin. “Humph! No!” he said musingly.
“Wouldn't do. The boy's such an utter idiot, he'd never learn to answer
to it.”

“Idiot, indeed!” cried my Lady. “He's no more an idiot than I am!”

“You're right, my dear,” the Vice-Warden soothingly I replied. “He
isn't, indeed!”

My Lady was appeased. “Let's go in and receive the Ambassador,” she
said, and beckoned to the Professor. “Which room is he waiting in?” she
inquired.

“In the Library, Madam.”

“And what did you say his name was?” said the Vice-Warden.

The Professor referred to a card he held in his hand. “His Adiposity the
Baron Doppelgeist.”

“Why does he come with such a funny name?” said my Lady.

“He couldn't well change it on the journey,” the Professor meekly
replied, “because of the luggage.”

“You go and receive him,” my Lady said to the Vice-Warden, “and I'll
attend to the children.”






CHAPTER 7. THE BARONS EMBASSY.

I was following the Vice-Warden, but, on second thoughts, went after my
Lady, being curious to see how she would manage to keep the children out
of sight.

I found her holding Sylvie's hand, and with her other hand stroking
Bruno's hair in a most tender and motherly fashion: both children were
looking bewildered and half-frightened.

“My own darlings,” she was saying, “I've been planning a little treat
for you! The Professor shall take you a long walk into the woods this
beautiful evening: and you shall take a basket of food with you, and
have a little picnic down by the river!”

Bruno jumped, and clapped his hands. “That are nice!” he cried. “Aren't
it, Sylvie?”

Sylvie, who hadn't quite lost her surprised look, put up her mouth for a
kiss. “Thank you very much,” she said earnestly.

My Lady turned her head away to conceal the broad grin of triumph that
spread over her vast face, like a ripple on a lake. “Little simpletons!”
 she muttered to herself, as she marched up to the house. I followed her
in.

“Quite so, your Excellency,” the Baron was saying as we entered the
Library. “All the infantry were under my command.” He turned, and was
duly presented to my Lady.

“A military hero?” said my Lady. The fat little man simpered. “Well,
yes,” he replied, modestly casting down his eyes. “My ancestors were all
famous for military genius.”

My Lady smiled graciously. “It often runs in families,” she remarked:
“just as a love for pastry does.”

The Baron looked slightly offended, and the Vice-Warden discreetly
changed the subject. “Dinner will soon be ready,” he said. “May I have
the honour of conducting your Adiposity to the guest-chamber?”

“Certainly, certainly!” the Baron eagerly assented. “It would never do
to keep dinner waiting!” And he almost trotted out of the room after the
Vice-Warden.

He was back again so speedily that the Vice-warden had barely time
to explain to my Lady that her remark about “a love for pastry” was
“unfortunate. You might have seen, with half an eye,” he added, “that
that's his line. Military genius, indeed! Pooh!”

“Dinner ready yet?” the Baron enquired, as he hurried into the room.

“Will be in a few minutes,” the Vice-Warden replied. “Meanwhile, let's
take a turn in the garden. You were telling me,” he continued, as the
trio left the house, “something about a great battle in which you had
the command of the infantry--”

“True,” said the Baron. “The enemy, as I was saying, far outnumbered
us: but I marched my men right into the middle of--what's that?” the
Military Hero exclaimed in agitated tones, drawing back behind the
Vice-Warden, as a strange creature rushed wildly upon them, brandishing
a spade.

“It's only the Gardener!” the Vice-Warden replied in an encouraging
tone. “Quite harmless, I assure you. Hark, he's singing! Its his
favorite amusement.”

And once more those shrill discordant tones rang out:--


    “He thought he saw a Banker's Clerk
    Descending from the bus:
    He looked again, and found it was
    A Hippopotamus:
    'If this should stay to dine,' he said,
    'There won't be mutch for us!'”

Throwing away the spade, he broke into a frantic jig, snapping his
fingers, and repeating, again and again,


    “There won't be much for us!
    There won't be much for us!”

{Image...It was a hippoptamus}

Once more the Baron looked slightly offended, but the Vice-Warden
hastily explained that the song had no allusion to him, and in fact had
no meaning at all. “You didn't mean anything by it, now did you?”
 He appealed to the Gardener, who had finished his song, and stood,
balancing himself on one leg, and looking at them, with his mouth open.

“I never means nothing,” said the Gardener: and Uggug luckily came up at
the moment, and gave the conversation a new turn.

“Allow me to present my son,” said the Vice-warden; adding, in a
whisper, “one of the best and cleverest boys that ever lived! I'll
contrive for you to see some of his cleverness. He knows everything that
other boys don't know; and in archery, in fishing, in painting, and
in music, his skill is--but you shall judge for yourself. You see that
target over there? He shall shoot an arrow at it. Dear boy,” he went on
aloud, “his Adiposity would like to see you shoot. Bring his Highness'
bow and arrows!”

Uggug looked very sulky as he received the bow and arrow, and prepared
to shoot. Just as the arrow left the bow, the Vice-Warden trod heavily
on the toe of the Baron, who yelled with the pain.

“Ten thousand pardons!” he exclaimed. “I stepped back in my excitement.
See! It is a bull's-eye!”

The Baron gazed in astonishment. “He held the bow so awkwardly, it
seemed impossible!” he muttered. But there was no room for doubt: there
was the arrow, right in the centre of the bull's-eye!

“The lake is close by,” continued the Vice-warden. “Bring his Highness'
fishing-rod!” And Uggug most unwillingly held the rod, and dangled the
fly over the water.

“A beetle on your arm!” cried my Lady, pinching the poor Baron's
arm worse than if ten lobsters had seized it at once. “That kind is
poisonous,” she explained. “But what a pity! You missed seeing the fish
pulled out!”

An enormous dead cod-fish was lying on the bank, with the hook in its
mouth.

“I had always fancied,” the Baron faltered, “that cod were salt-water
fish?”

“Not in this country,” said the Vice-Warden. “Shall we go in? Ask my son
some question on the way any subject you like!” And the sulky boy was
violently shoved forwards, to walk at the Baron's side.

“Could your Highness tell me,” the Baron cautiously began, “how much
seven times nine would come to?”

“Turn to the left!” cried the Vice-Warden, hastily stepping forwards to
show the way---so hastily, that he ran against his unfortunate guest,
who fell heavily on his face.

“So sorry!” my Lady exclaimed, as she and her husband helped him to his
feet again. “My son was in the act of saying 'sixty-three' as you fell!”

The Baron said nothing: he was covered with dust, and seemed much hurt,
both in body and mind. However, when they had got him into the house,
and given him a good brushing, matters looked a little better.

Dinner was served in due course, and every fresh dish seemed to increase
the good-humour of the Baron: but all efforts, to get him to express his
opinion as to Uggug's cleverness, were in vain, until that interesting
youth had left the room, and was seen from the open window, prowling
about the lawn with a little basket, which he was filling with frogs.

“So fond of Natural History as he is, dear boy!” said the doting mother.
“Now do tell us, Baron, what you think of him!”

“To be perfectly candid,” said the cautious Baron, “I would like a
little more evidence. I think you mentioned his skill in--”

“Music?” said the Vice-Warden. “Why, he's simply a prodigy! You shall
hear him play the piano.” And he walked to the window. “Ug--I mean my
boy! Come in for a minute, and bring the music-master with you! To turn
over the music for him,” he added as an explanation.

Uggug, having filled his basket with frogs, had no objection to obey,
and soon appeared in the room, followed by a fierce-looking little man,
who asked the Vice-Warden “Vot music vill you haf?”

“The Sonata that His Highness plays so charmingly,” said the
Vice-Warden. “His Highness haf not--” the music-master began, but was
sharply stopped by the Vice-warden.

“Silence, Sir! Go and turn over the music for his Highness. My dear,”
 (to the Wardeness) “will you show him what to do? And meanwhile, Baron,
I'll just show you a most interesting map we have--of Outland, and
Fairyland, and that sort of thing.”

By the time my Lady had returned, from explaining things to the
music-master, the map had been hung up, and the Baron was already much
bewildered by the Vice-Warden's habit of pointing to one place while he
shouted out the name of another.

{Image...The map of fairyland}

My Lady joining in, pointing out other places, and shouting other names,
only made matters worse; and at last the Baron, in despair, took to
pointing out places for himself, and feebly asked “Is that great yellow
splotch Fairyland?”

“Yes, that's Fairyland,” said the Vice-warden: “and you might as well
give him a hint,” he muttered to my Lady, “about going back to-morrow.
He eats like a shark! It would hardly do for me to mention it.”

His wife caught the idea, and at once began giving hints of the most
subtle and delicate kind. “Just see what a short way it is back to
Fairyland! Why, if you started to-morrow morning, you'd get there in
very little more than a week!”

The Baron looked incredulous. “It took me a full month to come,” he
said.

“But it's ever so much shorter, going back, you know!'

The Baron looked appealingly to the Vice-warden, who chimed in readily.
“You can go back five times, in the time it took you to come here
once--if you start to-morrow morning!”

All this time the Sonata was pealing through the room. The Baron could
not help admitting to himself that it was being magnificently played:
but he tried in vain to get a glimpse of the youthful performer. Every
time he had nearly succeeded in catching sight of him, either the
Vice-Warden or his wife was sure to get in the way, pointing out some
new place on the map, and deafening him with some new name.

He gave in at last, wished a hasty good-night, and left the room, while
his host and hostess interchanged looks of triumph.

“Deftly done!” cried the Vice-Warden. “Craftily contrived! But what
means all that tramping on the stairs?” He half-opened the door, looked
out, and added in a tone of dismay, “The Baron's boxes are being carried
down!”

“And what means all that rumbling of wheels?” cried my Lady. She peeped
through the window curtains. “The Baron's carriage has come round!” she
groaned.

At this moment the door opened: a fat, furious face looked in: a
voice, hoarse with passion, thundered out the words “My room is full of
frogs--I leave you!”: and the door closed again.

And still the noble Sonata went pealing through the room: but it was
Arthur's masterly touch that roused the echoes, and thrilled my very
soul with the tender music of the immortal 'Sonata Pathetique': and
it was not till the last note had died away that the tired but happy
traveler could bring himself to utter the words “good-night!” and to
seek his much-needed pillow.






CHAPTER 8. A RIDE ON A LION.

The next day glided away, pleasantly enough, partly in settling myself
in my new quarters, and partly in strolling round the neighbourhood,
under Arthur's guidance, and trying to form a general idea of Elveston
and its inhabitants. When five o'clock arrived, Arthur proposed without
any embarrassment this time--to take me with him up to 'the Hall,' in
order that I might make acquaintance with the Earl of Ainslie, who had
taken it for the season, and renew acquaintance with his daughter Lady
Muriel.

My first impressions of the gentle, dignified, and yet genial old man
were entirely favourable: and the real satisfaction that showed itself
on his daughter's face, as she met me with the words “this is indeed
an unlooked-for pleasure!”, was very soothing for whatever remains of
personal vanity the failures and disappointments of many long years, and
much buffeting with a rough world, had left in me.

Yet I noted, and was glad to note, evidence of a far deeper feeling than
mere friendly regard, in her meeting with Arthur though this was, as I
gathered, an almost daily occurrence--and the conversation between them,
in which the Earl and I were only occasional sharers, had an ease and a
spontaneity rarely met with except between very old friends: and, as
I knew that they had not known each other for a longer period than the
summer which was now rounding into autumn, I felt certain that 'Love,'
and Love alone, could explain the phenomenon.

“How convenient it would be,” Lady Muriel laughingly remarked, a propos
of my having insisted on saving her the trouble of carrying a cup of tea
across the room to the Earl, “if cups of tea had no weight at all! Then
perhaps ladies would sometimes be permitted to carry them for short
distances!”

“One can easily imagine a situation,” said Arthur, “where things would
necessarily have no weight, relatively to each other, though each would
have its usual weight, looked at by itself.”

“Some desperate paradox!” said the Earl. “Tell us how it could be. We
shall never guess it.”

“Well, suppose this house, just as it is, placed a few billion miles
above a planet, and with nothing else near enough to disturb it: of
course it falls to the planet?”

The Earl nodded. “Of course though it might take some centuries to do
it.”

“And is five-o'clock-tea to be going on all the while?” said Lady
Muriel.

“That, and other things,” said Arthur. “The inhabitants would live their
lives, grow up and die, and still the house would be falling, falling,
falling! But now as to the relative weight of things. Nothing can be
heavy, you know, except by trying to fall, and being prevented from
doing so. You all grant that?”

We all granted that.

“Well, now, if I take this book, and hold it out at arm's length, of
course I feel its weight. It is trying to fall, and I prevent it.
And, if I let go, it fails to the floor. But, if we were all falling
together, it couldn't be trying to fall any quicker, you know: for, if
I let go, what more could it do than fall? And, as my hand would be
falling too--at the same rate--it would never leave it, for that would
be to get ahead of it in the race. And it could never overtake the
failing floor!”

“I see it clearly,” said Lady Muriel. “But it makes one dizzy to think
of such things! How can you make us do it?”

“There is a more curious idea yet,” I ventured to say. “Suppose a cord
fastened to the house, from below, and pulled down by some one on the
planet. Then of course the house goes faster than its natural rate of
falling: but the furniture--with our noble selves--would go on failing
at their old pace, and would therefore be left behind.”

“Practically, we should rise to the ceiling,” said the Earl. “The
inevitable result of which would be concussion of brain.”

“To avoid that,” said Arthur, “let us have the furniture fixed to
the floor, and ourselves tied down to the furniture. Then the
five-o'clock-tea could go on in peace.”

“With one little drawback!” Lady Muriel gaily interrupted. “We should
take the cups down with us: but what about the tea?”

“I had forgotten the tea,” Arthur confessed. “That, no doubt, would rise
to the ceiling unless you chose to drink it on the way!”

“Which, I think, is quite nonsense enough for one while!” said the Earl.
“What news does this gentleman bring us from the great world of London?”

This drew me into the conversation, which now took a more conventional
tone. After a while, Arthur gave the signal for our departure, and in
the cool of the evening we strolled down to the beach, enjoying the
silence, broken only by the murmur of the sea and the far-away music of
some fishermen's song, almost as much as our late pleasant talk.

We sat down among the rocks, by a little pool, so rich in animal,
vegetable, and zoophytic--or whatever is the right word--life, that I
became entranced in the study of it, and, when Arthur proposed returning
to our lodgings, I begged to be left there for a while, to watch and
muse alone.

The fishermen's song grew ever nearer and clearer, as their boat stood
in for the beach; and I would have gone down to see them land their
cargo of fish, had not the microcosm at my feet stirred my curiosity yet
more keenly.

One ancient crab, that was for ever shuffling frantically from side to
side of the pool, had particularly fascinated me: there was a vacancy in
its stare, and an aimless violence in its behaviour, that irresistibly
recalled the Gardener who had befriended Sylvie and Bruno: and, as I
gazed, I caught the concluding notes of the tune of his crazy song.

The silence that followed was broken by the sweet voice of Sylvie.
“Would you please let us out into the road?”

“What! After that old beggar again?” the Gardener yelled, and began
singing:--


    “He thought he saw a Kangaroo
    That worked a coffee-mill:
    He looked again, and found it was
    A Vegetable-pill
    'Were I to swallow this,' he said,
    'I should be very ill!'”

{Image...He thought he saw a kangaroo}

“We don't want him to swallow anything,” Sylvie explained. “He's not
hungry. But we want to see him. So Will you please--”

“Certainly!” the Gardener promptly replied. “I always please. Never
displeases nobody. There you are!” And he flung the door open, and let
us out upon the dusty high-road.

We soon found our way to the bush, which had so mysteriously sunk into
the ground: and here Sylvie drew the Magic Locket from its hiding-place,
turned it over with a thoughtful air, and at last appealed to Bruno in a
rather helpless way. “What was it we had to do with it, Bruno? It's all
gone out of my head!”

“Kiss it!” was Bruno's invariable recipe in cases of doubt and
difficulty. Sylvie kissed it, but no result followed.

“Rub it the wrong way,” was Bruno's next suggestion.

“Which is the wrong way?”, Sylvie most reasonably enquired. The obvious
plan was to try both ways.

Rubbing from left to right had no visible effect whatever.

From right to left--“Oh, stop, Sylvie!” Bruno cried in sudden alarm.
“Whatever is going to happen?”

For a number of trees, on the neighbouring hillside, were moving slowly
upwards, in solemn procession: while a mild little brook, that had been
rippling at our feet a moment before, began to swell, and foam, and
hiss, and bubble, in a truly alarming fashion.

“Rub it some other way!” cried Bruno. “Try up-and-down! Quick!”

It was a happy thought. Up-and-down did it: and the landscape, which had
been showing signs of mental aberration in various directions, returned
to its normal condition of sobriety with the exception of a small
yellowish-brown mouse, which continued to run wildly up and down the
road, lashing its tail like a little lion.

“Let's follow it,” said Sylvie: and this also turned out a happy
thought. The mouse at once settled down into a business-like jog-trot,
with which we could easily keep pace. The only phenomenon, that gave
me any uneasiness, was the rapid increase in the size of the little
creature we were following, which became every moment more and more like
a real lion.

Soon the transformation was complete: and a noble lion stood patiently
waiting for us to come up with it. No thought of fear seemed to occur
to the children, who patted and stroked it as if it had been a
Shetland-pony.

{Image...The mouse-lion}

“Help me up!” cried Bruno. And in another moment Sylvie had lifted him
upon the broad back of the gentle beast, and seated herself behind him,
pillion-fashion. Bruno took a good handful of mane in each hand, and
made believe to guide this new kind of steed. “Gee-up!', seemed quite
sufficient by way of verbal direction: the lion at once broke into an
easy canter, and we soon found ourselves in the depths of the forest. I
say 'we,' for I am certain that I accompanied them though how I managed
to keep up with a cantering lion I am wholly unable to explain. But
I was certainly one of the party when we came upon an old beggar-man
cutting sticks, at whose feet the lion made a profound obeisance, Sylvie
and Bruno at the same moment dismounting, and leaping in to the arms of
their father.

“From bad to worse!” the old man said to himself, dreamily, when the
children had finished their rather confused account of the Ambassador's
visit, gathered no doubt from general report, as they had not seen him
themselves. “From bad to worse! That is their destiny. I see it, but
I cannot alter it. The selfishness of a mean and crafty man--the
selfishness of an ambitious and silly woman----the selfishness of a
spiteful and loveless child all tend one way, from bad to worse! And
you, my darlings, must suffer it awhile, I fear. Yet, when things are at
their worst, you can come to me. I can do but little as yet--”

Gathering up a handful of dust and scattering it in the air, he slowly
and solemnly pronounced some words that sounded like a charm, the
children looking on in awe-struck silence:--


    “Let craft, ambition, spite,
    Be quenched in Reason's night,
    Till weakness turn to might,
    Till what is dark be light,
    Till what is wrong be right!”

The cloud of dust spread itself out through the air, as if it were
alive, forming curious shapes that were for ever changing into others.

“It makes letters! It makes words!” Bruno whispered, as he clung,
half-frightened, to Sylvie. “Only I ca'n't make them out! Read them,
Sylvie!”

“I'll try,” Sylvie gravely replied. “Wait a minute--if only I could see
that word--”

“I should be very ill!', a discordant voice yelled in our ears.


    “Were I to swallow this,' he said,
    'I should be very ill!'”





CHAPTER 9. A JESTER AND A BEAR.

Yes, we were in the garden once more: and, to escape that horrid
discordant voice, we hurried indoors, and found ourselves in the
library--Uggug blubbering, the Professor standing by with a bewildered
air, and my Lady, with her arms clasped round her son's neck, repeating,
over and over again, “and did they give him nasty lessons to learn? My
own pretty pet!”

“What's all this noise about?” the Vice-warden angrily enquired, as he
strode into the room. “And who put the hat-stand here?”

And he hung his hat up on Bruno, who was standing in the middle of the
room, too much astonished by the sudden change of scene to make any
attempt at removing it, though it came down to his shoulders, making him
look something like a small candle with a large extinguisher over it.

The Professor mildly explained that His Highness had been graciously
pleased to say he wouldn't do his lessons.

“Do your lessons this instant, you young cub!” thundered the
Vice-Warden. “And take this!” and a resounding box on the ear made the
unfortunate Professor reel across the room.