BOOK XXII.


ARGUMENT.

THE DEATH OF HECTOR.

The Trojans being safe within the walls, Hector only stays to oppose
Achilles. Priam is struck at his approach, and tries to persuade his son
to re-enter the town. Hecuba joins her entreaties, but in vain. Hector
consults within himself what measures to take; but at the advance of
Achilles, his resolution fails him, and he flies. Achilles pursues him
thrice round the walls of Troy. The gods debate concerning the fate of
Hector; at length Minerva descends to the aid of Achilles. She deludes
Hector in the shape of Deiphobus; he stands the combat, and is slain.
Achilles drags the dead body at his chariot in the sight of Priam and
Hecuba. Their lamentations, tears, and despair. Their cries reach the ears
of Andromache, who, ignorant of this, was retired into the inner part of
the palace: she mounts up to the walls, and beholds her dead husband. She
swoons at the spectacle. Her excess of grief and lamentation.

The thirtieth day still continues. The scene lies under the walls, and on
the battlements of Troy.

  Thus to their bulwarks, smit with panic fear,
  The herded Ilians rush like driven deer:
  There safe they wipe the briny drops away,
  And drown in bowls the labours of the day.
  Close to the walls, advancing o’er the fields
  Beneath one roof of well-compacted shields,
  March, bending on, the Greeks’ embodied powers,
  Far stretching in the shade of Trojan towers.
  Great Hector singly stay’d: chain’d down by fate
  There fix’d he stood before the Scaean gate;
  Still his bold arms determined to employ,
  The guardian still of long-defended Troy.

  Apollo now to tired Achilles turns:
  (The power confess’d in all his glory burns:)
  "And what (he cries) has Peleus’ son in view,
  With mortal speed a godhead to pursue?
  For not to thee to know the gods is given,
  Unskill’d to trace the latent marks of heaven.
  What boots thee now, that Troy forsook the plain?
  Vain thy past labour, and thy present vain:
  Safe in their walls are now her troops bestow’d,
  While here thy frantic rage attacks a god."

  The chief incensed—"Too partial god of day!
  To check my conquests in the middle way:
  How few in Ilion else had refuge found!
  What gasping numbers now had bit the ground!
  Thou robb’st me of a glory justly mine,
  Powerful of godhead, and of fraud divine:
  Mean fame, alas! for one of heavenly strain,
  To cheat a mortal who repines in vain."

  Then to the city, terrible and strong,
  With high and haughty steps he tower’d along,
  So the proud courser, victor of the prize,
  To the near goal with double ardour flies.
  Him, as he blazing shot across the field,
  The careful eyes of Priam first beheld.
  Not half so dreadful rises to the sight,(274)
  Through the thick gloom of some tempestuous night,
  Orion’s dog (the year when autumn weighs),
  And o’er the feebler stars exerts his rays;
  Terrific glory! for his burning breath
  Taints the red air with fevers, plagues, and death.
  So flamed his fiery mail. Then wept the sage:
  He strikes his reverend head, now white with age;
  He lifts his wither’d arms; obtests the skies;
  He calls his much-loved son with feeble cries:
  The son, resolved Achilles’ force to dare,
  Full at the Scaean gates expects the war;
  While the sad father on the rampart stands,
  And thus adjures him with extended hands:

  "Ah stay not, stay not! guardless and alone;
  Hector! my loved, my dearest, bravest son!
  Methinks already I behold thee slain,
  And stretch’d beneath that fury of the plain.
  Implacable Achilles! might’st thou be
  To all the gods no dearer than to me!
  Thee, vultures wild should scatter round the shore.
  And bloody dogs grow fiercer from thy gore.
  How many valiant sons I late enjoy’d,
  Valiant in vain! by thy cursed arm destroy’d:
  Or, worse than slaughtered, sold in distant isles
  To shameful bondage, and unworthy toils.
  Two, while I speak, my eyes in vain explore,
  Two from one mother sprung, my Polydore,
  And loved Lycaon; now perhaps no more!
  Oh! if in yonder hostile camp they live,
  What heaps of gold, what treasures would I give!
  (Their grandsire’s wealth, by right of birth their own,
  Consign’d his daughter with Lelegia’s throne:)
  But if (which Heaven forbid) already lost,
  All pale they wander on the Stygian coast;
  What sorrows then must their sad mother know,
  What anguish I? unutterable woe!
  Yet less that anguish, less to her, to me,
  Less to all Troy, if not deprived of thee.
  Yet shun Achilles! enter yet the wall;
  And spare thyself, thy father, spare us all!
  Save thy dear life; or, if a soul so brave
  Neglect that thought, thy dearer glory save.
  Pity, while yet I live, these silver hairs;
  While yet thy father feels the woes he bears,
  Yet cursed with sense! a wretch, whom in his rage
  (All trembling on the verge of helpless age)
  Great Jove has placed, sad spectacle of pain!
  The bitter dregs of fortune’s cup to drain:
  To fill with scenes of death his closing eyes,
  And number all his days by miseries!
  My heroes slain, my bridal bed o’erturn’d,
  My daughters ravish’d, and my city burn’d,
  My bleeding infants dash’d against the floor;
  These I have yet to see, perhaps yet more!
  Perhaps even I, reserved by angry fate,
  The last sad relic of my ruin’d state,
  (Dire pomp of sovereign wretchedness!) must fall,
  And stain the pavement of my regal hall;
  Where famish’d dogs, late guardians of my door,
  Shall lick their mangled master’s spatter’d gore.
  Yet for my sons I thank ye, gods! ’tis well;
  Well have they perish’d, for in fight they fell.
  Who dies in youth and vigour, dies the best,
  Struck through with wounds, all honest on the breast.
  But when the fates, in fulness of their rage,
  Spurn the hoar head of unresisting age,
  In dust the reverend lineaments deform,
  And pour to dogs the life-blood scarcely warm:
  This, this is misery! the last, the worse,
  That man can feel! man, fated to be cursed!"

  He said, and acting what no words could say,
  Rent from his head the silver locks away.
  With him the mournful mother bears a part;
  Yet all her sorrows turn not Hector’s heart.
  The zone unbraced, her bosom she display’d;
  And thus, fast-falling the salt tears, she said:

  "Have mercy on me, O my son! revere
  The words of age; attend a parent’s prayer!
  If ever thee in these fond arms I press’d,
  Or still’d thy infant clamours at this breast;
  Ah do not thus our helpless years forego,
  But, by our walls secured, repel the foe.
  Against his rage if singly thou proceed,
  Should’st thou, (but Heaven avert it!) should’st thou bleed,
  Nor must thy corse lie honour’d on the bier,
  Nor spouse, nor mother, grace thee with a tear!
  Far from our pious rites those dear remains
  Must feast the vultures on the naked plains."

  So they, while down their cheeks the torrents roll;
  But fix’d remains the purpose of his soul;
  Resolved he stands, and with a fiery glance
  Expects the hero’s terrible advance.
  So, roll’d up in his den, the swelling snake
  Beholds the traveller approach the brake;
  When fed with noxious herbs his turgid veins
  Have gather’d half the poisons of the plains;
  He burns, he stiffens with collected ire,
  And his red eyeballs glare with living fire.
  Beneath a turret, on his shield reclined,
  He stood, and question’d thus his mighty mind:(275)

  "Where lies my way? to enter in the wall?
  Honour and shame the ungenerous thought recall:
  Shall proud Polydamas before the gate
  Proclaim, his counsels are obey’d too late,
  Which timely follow’d but the former night,
  What numbers had been saved by Hector’s flight?
  That wise advice rejected with disdain,
  I feel my folly in my people slain.
  Methinks my suffering country’s voice I hear,
  But most her worthless sons insult my ear,
  On my rash courage charge the chance of war,
  And blame those virtues which they cannot share.
  No—if I e’er return, return I must
  Glorious, my country’s terror laid in dust:
  Or if I perish, let her see me fall
  In field at least, and fighting for her wall.
  And yet suppose these measures I forego,
  Approach unarm’d, and parley with the foe,
  The warrior-shield, the helm, and lance, lay down.
  And treat on terms of peace to save the town:
  The wife withheld, the treasure ill-detain’d
  (Cause of the war, and grievance of the land)
  With honourable justice to restore:
  And add half Ilion’s yet remaining store,
  Which Troy shall, sworn, produce; that injured Greece
  May share our wealth, and leave our walls in peace.
  But why this thought? Unarm’d if I should go,
  What hope of mercy from this vengeful foe,
  But woman-like to fall, and fall without a blow?
  We greet not here, as man conversing man,
  Met at an oak, or journeying o’er a plain;
  No season now for calm familiar talk,
  Like youths and maidens in an evening walk:
  War is our business, but to whom is given
  To die, or triumph, that, determine Heaven!"

  Thus pondering, like a god the Greek drew nigh;
  His dreadful plumage nodded from on high;
  The Pelian javelin, in his better hand,
  Shot trembling rays that glitter’d o’er the land;
  And on his breast the beamy splendour shone,
  Like Jove’s own lightning, or the rising sun.
  As Hector sees, unusual terrors rise,
  Struck by some god, he fears, recedes, and flies.
  He leaves the gates, he leaves the wall behind:
  Achilles follows like the winged wind.
  Thus at the panting dove a falcon flies
  (The swiftest racer of the liquid skies),
  Just when he holds, or thinks he holds his prey,
  Obliquely wheeling through the aerial way,
  With open beak and shrilling cries he springs,
  And aims his claws, and shoots upon his wings:
  No less fore-right the rapid chase they held,
  One urged by fury, one by fear impell’d:
  Now circling round the walls their course maintain,
  Where the high watch-tower overlooks the plain;
  Now where the fig-trees spread their umbrage broad,
  (A wider compass,) smoke along the road.
  Next by Scamander’s double source they bound,
  Where two famed fountains burst the parted ground;
  This hot through scorching clefts is seen to rise,
  With exhalations steaming to the skies;
  That the green banks in summer’s heat o’erflows,
  Like crystal clear, and cold as winter snows:
  Each gushing fount a marble cistern fills,
  Whose polish’d bed receives the falling rills;
  Where Trojan dames (ere yet alarm’d by Greece)
  Wash’d their fair garments in the days of peace.(276)
  By these they pass’d, one chasing, one in flight:
  (The mighty fled, pursued by stronger might:)
  Swift was the course; no vulgar prize they play,
  No vulgar victim must reward the day:
  (Such as in races crown the speedy strife:)
  The prize contended was great Hector’s life.
  As when some hero’s funerals are decreed
  In grateful honour of the mighty dead;
  Where high rewards the vigorous youth inflame
  (Some golden tripod, or some lovely dame)
  The panting coursers swiftly turn the goal,
  And with them turns the raised spectator’s soul:
  Thus three times round the Trojan wall they fly.
  The gazing gods lean forward from the sky;
  To whom, while eager on the chase they look,
  The sire of mortals and immortals spoke:

  "Unworthy sight! the man beloved of heaven,
  Behold, inglorious round yon city driven!
  My heart partakes the generous Hector’s pain;
  Hector, whose zeal whole hecatombs has slain,
  Whose grateful fumes the gods received with joy,
  From Ida’s summits, and the towers of Troy:
  Now see him flying; to his fears resign’d,
  And fate, and fierce Achilles, close behind.
  Consult, ye powers! (’tis worthy your debate)
  Whether to snatch him from impending fate,
  Or let him bear, by stern Pelides slain,
  (Good as he is) the lot imposed on man."

  Then Pallas thus: "Shall he whose vengeance forms
  The forky bolt, and blackens heaven with storms,
  Shall he prolong one Trojan’s forfeit breath?
  A man, a mortal, pre-ordain’d to death!
  And will no murmurs fill the courts above?
  No gods indignant blame their partial Jove?"

  "Go then (return’d the sire) without delay,
  Exert thy will: I give the Fates their way.
  Swift at the mandate pleased Tritonia flies,
  And stoops impetuous from the cleaving skies.

  As through the forest, o’er the vale and lawn,
  The well-breath’d beagle drives the flying fawn,
  In vain he tries the covert of the brakes,
  Or deep beneath the trembling thicket shakes;
  Sure of the vapour in the tainted dews,
  The certain hound his various maze pursues.
  Thus step by step, where’er the Trojan wheel’d,
  There swift Achilles compass’d round the field.
  Oft as to reach the Dardan gates he bends,
  And hopes the assistance of his pitying friends,
  (Whose showering arrows, as he coursed below,
  From the high turrets might oppress the foe,)
  So oft Achilles turns him to the plain:
  He eyes the city, but he eyes in vain.
  As men in slumbers seem with speedy pace,
  One to pursue, and one to lead the chase,
  Their sinking limbs the fancied course forsake,
  Nor this can fly, nor that can overtake:
  No less the labouring heroes pant and strain:
  While that but flies, and this pursues in vain.

  What god, O muse, assisted Hector’s force
  With fate itself so long to hold the course?
  Phoebus it was; who, in his latest hour,
  Endued his knees with strength, his nerves with power:
  And great Achilles, lest some Greek’s advance
  Should snatch the glory from his lifted lance,
  Sign’d to the troops to yield his foe the way,
  And leave untouch’d the honours of the day.

  Jove lifts the golden balances, that show
  The fates of mortal men, and things below:
  Here each contending hero’s lot he tries,
  And weighs, with equal hand, their destinies.
  Low sinks the scale surcharged with Hector’s fate;
  Heavy with death it sinks, and hell receives the weight.

  Then Phoebus left him. Fierce Minerva flies
  To stern Pelides, and triumphing, cries:
  "O loved of Jove! this day our labours cease,
  And conquest blazes with full beams on Greece.
  Great Hector falls; that Hector famed so far,
  Drunk with renown, insatiable of war,
  Falls by thy hand, and mine! nor force, nor flight,
  Shall more avail him, nor his god of light.
  See, where in vain he supplicates above,
  Roll’d at the feet of unrelenting Jove;
  Rest here: myself will lead the Trojan on,
  And urge to meet the fate he cannot shun."

  Her voice divine the chief with joyful mind
  Obey’d; and rested, on his lance reclined
  While like Deiphobus the martial dame
  (Her face, her gesture, and her arms the same),
  In show an aid, by hapless Hector’s side
  Approach’d, and greets him thus with voice belied:

  "Too long, O Hector! have I borne the sight
  Of this distress, and sorrow’d in thy flight:
  It fits us now a noble stand to make,
  And here, as brothers, equal fates partake."

  Then he: "O prince! allied in blood and fame,
  Dearer than all that own a brother’s name;
  Of all that Hecuba to Priam bore,
  Long tried, long loved: much loved, but honoured more!
  Since you, of all our numerous race alone
  Defend my life, regardless of your own."

  Again the goddess: "Much my father’s prayer,
  And much my mother’s, press’d me to forbear:
  My friends embraced my knees, adjured my stay,
  But stronger love impell’d, and I obey.
  Come then, the glorious conflict let us try,
  Let the steel sparkle, and the javelin fly;
  Or let us stretch Achilles on the field,
  Or to his arm our bloody trophies yield."

  Fraudful she said; then swiftly march’d before:
  The Dardan hero shuns his foe no more.
  Sternly they met. The silence Hector broke:
  His dreadful plumage nodded as he spoke:

  "Enough, O son of Peleus! Troy has view’d
  Her walls thrice circled, and her chief pursued.
  But now some god within me bids me try
  Thine, or my fate: I kill thee, or I die.
  Yet on the verge of battle let us stay,
  And for a moment’s space suspend the day;
  Let Heaven’s high powers be call’d to arbitrate
  The just conditions of this stern debate,
  (Eternal witnesses of all below,
  And faithful guardians of the treasured vow!)
  To them I swear; if, victor in the strife,
  Jove by these hands shall shed thy noble life,
  No vile dishonour shall thy corse pursue;
  Stripp’d of its arms alone (the conqueror’s due)
  The rest to Greece uninjured I’ll restore:
  Now plight thy mutual oath, I ask no more."

  "Talk not of oaths (the dreadful chief replies,
  While anger flash’d from his disdainful eyes),
  Detested as thou art, and ought to be,
  Nor oath nor pact Achilles plights with thee:
  Such pacts as lambs and rabid wolves combine,
  Such leagues as men and furious lions join,
  To such I call the gods! one constant state
  Of lasting rancour and eternal hate:
  No thought but rage, and never-ceasing strife,
  Till death extinguish rage, and thought, and life.
  Rouse then thy forces this important hour,
  Collect thy soul, and call forth all thy power.
  No further subterfuge, no further chance;
  ’Tis Pallas, Pallas gives thee to my lance.
  Each Grecian ghost, by thee deprived of breath,
  Now hovers round, and calls thee to thy death."

  He spoke, and launch’d his javelin at the foe;
  But Hector shunn’d the meditated blow:
  He stoop’d, while o’er his head the flying spear
  Sang innocent, and spent its force in air.
  Minerva watch’d it falling on the land,
  Then drew, and gave to great Achilles’ hand,
  Unseen of Hector, who, elate with joy,
  Now shakes his lance, and braves the dread of Troy.

  "The life you boasted to that javelin given,
  Prince! you have miss’d. My fate depends on Heaven,
  To thee, presumptuous as thou art, unknown,
  Or what must prove my fortune, or thy own.
  Boasting is but an art, our fears to blind,
  And with false terrors sink another’s mind.
  But know, whatever fate I am to try,
  By no dishonest wound shall Hector die.
  I shall not fall a fugitive at least,
  My soul shall bravely issue from my breast.
  But first, try thou my arm; and may this dart
  End all my country’s woes, deep buried in thy heart."

  The weapon flew, its course unerring held,
  Unerring, but the heavenly shield repell’d
  The mortal dart; resulting with a bound
  From off the ringing orb, it struck the ground.
  Hector beheld his javelin fall in vain,
  Nor other lance, nor other hope remain;
  He calls Deiphobus, demands a spear—
  In vain, for no Deiphobus was there.
  All comfortless he stands: then, with a sigh;
  "’Tis so—Heaven wills it, and my hour is nigh!
  I deem’d Deiphobus had heard my call,
  But he secure lies guarded in the wall.
  A god deceived me; Pallas, ’twas thy deed,
  Death and black fate approach! ’tis I must bleed.
  No refuge now, no succour from above,
  Great Jove deserts me, and the son of Jove,
  Propitious once, and kind! Then welcome fate!
  ’Tis true I perish, yet I perish great:
  Yet in a mighty deed I shall expire,
  Let future ages hear it, and admire!"

  Fierce, at the word, his weighty sword he drew,
  And, all collected, on Achilles flew.
  So Jove’s bold bird, high balanced in the air,
  Stoops from the clouds to truss the quivering hare.
  Nor less Achilles his fierce soul prepares:
  Before his breast the flaming shield he bears,
  Refulgent orb! above his fourfold cone
  The gilded horse-hair sparkled in the sun.
  Nodding at every step: (Vulcanian frame!)
  And as he moved, his figure seem’d on flame.
  As radiant Hesper shines with keener light,(277)
  Far-beaming o’er the silver host of night,
  When all the starry train emblaze the sphere:
  So shone the point of great Achilles’ spear.
  In his right hand he waves the weapon round,
  Eyes the whole man, and meditates the wound;
  But the rich mail Patroclus lately wore
  Securely cased the warrior’s body o’er.
  One space at length he spies, to let in fate,
  Where ’twixt the neck and throat the jointed plate
  Gave entrance: through that penetrable part
  Furious he drove the well-directed dart:
  Nor pierced the windpipe yet, nor took the power
  Of speech, unhappy! from thy dying hour.
  Prone on the field the bleeding warrior lies,
  While, thus triumphing, stern Achilles cries:

  "At last is Hector stretch’d upon the plain,
  Who fear’d no vengeance for Patroclus slain:
  Then, prince! you should have fear’d, what now you feel;
  Achilles absent was Achilles still:
  Yet a short space the great avenger stayed,
  Then low in dust thy strength and glory laid.
  Peaceful he sleeps, with all our rites adorn’d,
  For ever honour’d, and for ever mourn’d:
  While cast to all the rage of hostile power,
  Thee birds shall mangle, and the gods devour."

  Then Hector, fainting at the approach of death:
  "By thy own soul! by those who gave thee breath!
  By all the sacred prevalence of prayer;
  Ah, leave me not for Grecian dogs to tear!
  The common rites of sepulture bestow,
  To soothe a father’s and a mother’s woe:
  Let their large gifts procure an urn at least,
  And Hector’s ashes in his country rest."

  "No, wretch accursed! relentless he replies;
  (Flames, as he spoke, shot flashing from his eyes;)
  Not those who gave me breath should bid me spare,
  Nor all the sacred prevalence of prayer.
  Could I myself the bloody banquet join!
  No—to the dogs that carcase I resign.
  Should Troy, to bribe me, bring forth all her store,
  And giving thousands, offer thousands more;
  Should Dardan Priam, and his weeping dame,
  Drain their whole realm to buy one funeral flame:
  Their Hector on the pile they should not see,
  Nor rob the vultures of one limb of thee."

  Then thus the chief his dying accents drew:
  "Thy rage, implacable! too well I knew:
  The Furies that relentless breast have steel’d,
  And cursed thee with a heart that cannot yield.
  Yet think, a day will come, when fate’s decree
  And angry gods shall wreak this wrong on thee;
  Phoebus and Paris shall avenge my fate,
  And stretch thee here before the Scaean gate."(278)

  He ceased. The Fates suppress’d his labouring breath,
  And his eyes stiffen’d at the hand of death;
  To the dark realm the spirit wings its way,
  (The manly body left a load of clay,)
  And plaintive glides along the dreary coast,
  A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!

  Achilles, musing as he roll’d his eyes
  O’er the dead hero, thus unheard, replies:
  "Die thou the first! When Jove and heaven ordain,
  I follow thee"—He said, and stripp’d the slain.
  Then forcing backward from the gaping wound
  The reeking javelin, cast it on the ground.
  The thronging Greeks behold with wondering eyes
  His manly beauty and superior size;
  While some, ignobler, the great dead deface
  With wounds ungenerous, or with taunts disgrace:

  "How changed that Hector, who like Jove of late
  Sent lightning on our fleets, and scatter’d fate!"

  High o’er the slain the great Achilles stands,
  Begirt with heroes and surrounding bands;
  And thus aloud, while all the host attends:
  "Princes and leaders! countrymen and friends!
  Since now at length the powerful will of heaven
  The dire destroyer to our arm has given,
  Is not Troy fallen already? Haste, ye powers!
  See, if already their deserted towers
  Are left unmann’d; or if they yet retain
  The souls of heroes, their great Hector slain.
  But what is Troy, or glory what to me?
  Or why reflects my mind on aught but thee,
  Divine Patroclus! Death hath seal’d his eyes;
  Unwept, unhonour’d, uninterr’d he lies!
  Can his dear image from my soul depart,
  Long as the vital spirit moves my heart?
  If in the melancholy shades below,
  The flames of friends and lovers cease to glow,
  Yet mine shall sacred last; mine, undecay’d,
  Burn on through death, and animate my shade.
  Meanwhile, ye sons of Greece, in triumph bring
  The corpse of Hector, and your paeans sing.
  Be this the song, slow-moving toward the shore,
  "Hector is dead, and Ilion is no more."

  Then his fell soul a thought of vengeance bred;
  (Unworthy of himself, and of the dead;)
  The nervous ancles bored, his feet he bound
  With thongs inserted through the double wound;
  These fix’d up high behind the rolling wain,
  His graceful head was trail’d along the plain.
  Proud on his car the insulting victor stood,
  And bore aloft his arms, distilling blood.
  He smites the steeds; the rapid chariot flies;
  The sudden clouds of circling dust arise.
  Now lost is all that formidable air;
  The face divine, and long-descending hair,
  Purple the ground, and streak the sable sand;
  Deform’d, dishonour’d, in his native land,
  Given to the rage of an insulting throng,
  And, in his parents’ sight, now dragg’d along!

  The mother first beheld with sad survey;
  She rent her tresses, venerable grey,
  And cast, far off, the regal veils away.
  With piercing shrieks his bitter fate she moans,
  While the sad father answers groans with groans
  Tears after tears his mournful cheeks o’erflow,
  And the whole city wears one face of woe:
  No less than if the rage of hostile fires.
  From her foundations curling to her spires,
  O’er the proud citadel at length should rise,
  And the last blaze send Ilion to the skies.
  The wretched monarch of the falling state,
  Distracted, presses to the Dardan gate.
  Scarce the whole people stop his desperate course,
  While strong affliction gives the feeble force:
  Grief tears his heart, and drives him to and fro,
  In all the raging impotence of woe.
  At length he roll’d in dust, and thus begun,
  Imploring all, and naming one by one:
  "Ah! let me, let me go where sorrow calls;
  I, only I, will issue from your walls
  (Guide or companion, friends! I ask ye none),
  And bow before the murderer of my son.
  My grief perhaps his pity may engage;
  Perhaps at least he may respect my age.
  He has a father too; a man like me;
  One, not exempt from age and misery
  (Vigorous no more, as when his young embrace
  Begot this pest of me, and all my race).
  How many valiant sons, in early bloom,
  Has that cursed hand send headlong to the tomb!
  Thee, Hector! last: thy loss (divinely brave)
  Sinks my sad soul with sorrow to the grave.
  O had thy gentle spirit pass’d in peace,
  The son expiring in the sire’s embrace,
  While both thy parents wept the fatal hour,
  And, bending o’er thee, mix’d the tender shower!
  Some comfort that had been, some sad relief,
  To melt in full satiety of grief!"

  Thus wail’d the father, grovelling on the ground,
  And all the eyes of Ilion stream’d around.

  Amidst her matrons Hecuba appears:
  (A mourning princess, and a train in tears;)
  "Ah why has Heaven prolong’d this hated breath,
  Patient of horrors, to behold thy death?
  O Hector! late thy parents’ pride and joy,
  The boast of nations! the defence of Troy!
  To whom her safety and her fame she owed;
  Her chief, her hero, and almost her god!
  O fatal change! become in one sad day
  A senseless corse! inanimated clay!"

  But not as yet the fatal news had spread
  To fair Andromache, of Hector dead;
  As yet no messenger had told his fate,
  Not e’en his stay without the Scaean gate.
  Far in the close recesses of the dome,
  Pensive she plied the melancholy loom;
  A growing work employ’d her secret hours,
  Confusedly gay with intermingled flowers.
  Her fair-haired handmaids heat the brazen urn,
  The bath preparing for her lord’s return
  In vain; alas! her lord returns no more;
  Unbathed he lies, and bleeds along the shore!
  Now from the walls the clamours reach her ear,
  And all her members shake with sudden fear:
  Forth from her ivory hand the shuttle falls,
  And thus, astonish’d, to her maids she calls:

                        [Illustration: THE BATH.]

                                THE BATH.


  "Ah follow me! (she cried) what plaintive noise
  Invades my ear? ’Tis sure my mother’s voice.
  My faltering knees their trembling frame desert,
  A pulse unusual flutters at my heart;
  Some strange disaster, some reverse of fate
  (Ye gods avert it!) threats the Trojan state.
  Far be the omen which my thoughts suggest!
  But much I fear my Hector’s dauntless breast
  Confronts Achilles; chased along the plain,
  Shut from our walls! I fear, I fear him slain!
  Safe in the crowd he ever scorn’d to wait,
  And sought for glory in the jaws of fate:
  Perhaps that noble heat has cost his breath,
  Now quench’d for ever in the arms of death."

  She spoke: and furious, with distracted pace,
  Fears in her heart, and anguish in her face,
  Flies through the dome (the maids her steps pursue),
  And mounts the walls, and sends around her view.
  Too soon her eyes the killing object found,
  The godlike Hector dragg’d along the ground.
  A sudden darkness shades her swimming eyes:
  She faints, she falls; her breath, her colour flies.
  Her hair’s fair ornaments, the braids that bound,
  The net that held them, and the wreath that crown’d,
  The veil and diadem flew far away
  (The gift of Venus on her bridal day).
  Around a train of weeping sisters stands,
  To raise her sinking with assistant hands.
  Scarce from the verge of death recall’d, again
  She faints, or but recovers to complain.

             [Illustration: ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL.]

                     ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL.


  "O wretched husband of a wretched wife!
  Born with one fate, to one unhappy life!
  For sure one star its baneful beam display’d
  On Priam’s roof, and Hippoplacia’s shade.
  From different parents, different climes we came.
  At different periods, yet our fate the same!
  Why was my birth to great Aetion owed,
  And why was all that tender care bestow’d?
  Would I had never been!—O thou, the ghost
  Of my dead husband! miserably lost!
  Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
  And I abandon’d, desolate, alone!
  An only child, once comfort of my pains,
  Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
  No more to smile upon his sire; no friend
  To help him now! no father to defend!
  For should he ’scape the sword, the common doom,
  What wrongs attend him, and what griefs to come!
  Even from his own paternal roof expell’d,
  Some stranger ploughs his patrimonial field.
  The day, that to the shades the father sends,
  Robs the sad orphan of his father’s friends:
  He, wretched outcast of mankind! appears
  For ever sad, for ever bathed in tears;
  Amongst the happy, unregarded, he
  Hangs on the robe, or trembles at the knee,
  While those his father’s former bounty fed
  Nor reach the goblet, nor divide the bread:
  The kindest but his present wants allay,
  To leave him wretched the succeeding day.
  Frugal compassion! Heedless, they who boast
  Both parents still, nor feel what he has lost,
  Shall cry, ’Begone! thy father feasts not here:’
  The wretch obeys, retiring with a tear.
  Thus wretched, thus retiring all in tears,
  To my sad soul Astyanax appears!
  Forced by repeated insults to return,
  And to his widow’d mother vainly mourn:
  He, who, with tender delicacy bred,
  With princes sported, and on dainties fed,
  And when still evening gave him up to rest,
  Sunk soft in down upon the nurse’s breast,
  Must—ah what must he not? Whom Ilion calls
  Astyanax, from her well-guarded walls,(279)
  Is now that name no more, unhappy boy!
  Since now no more thy father guards his Troy.
  But thou, my Hector, liest exposed in air,
  Far from thy parents’ and thy consort’s care;
  Whose hand in vain, directed by her love,
  The martial scarf and robe of triumph wove.
  Now to devouring flames be these a prey,
  Useless to thee, from this accursed day!
  Yet let the sacrifice at least be paid,
  An honour to the living, not the dead!"

  So spake the mournful dame: her matrons hear,
  Sigh back her sighs, and answer tear with tear.





BOOK XXIII.


ARGUMENT.

FUNERAL GAMES IN HONOUR OF PATROCLUS.(280)

Achilles and the Myrmidons do honours to the body of Patroclus. After the
funeral feast he retires to the sea-shore, where, falling asleep, the
ghost of his friend appears to him, and demands the rites of burial; the
next morning the soldiers are sent with mules and waggons to fetch wood
for the pyre. The funeral procession, and the offering their hair to the
dead. Achilles sacrifices several animals, and lastly twelve Trojan
captives, at the pile; then sets fire to it. He pays libations to the
Winds, which (at the instance of Iris) rise, and raise the flames. When
the pile has burned all night, they gather the bones, place them in an urn
of gold, and raise the tomb. Achilles institutes the funeral games: the
chariot-race, the fight of the caestus, the wrestling, the foot-race, the
single combat, the discus, the shooting with arrows, the darting the
javelin: the various descriptions of which, and the various success of the
several antagonists, make the greatest part of the book.

In this book ends the thirtieth day. The night following, the ghost of
Patroclus appears to Achilles: the one-and-thirtieth day is employed in
felling the timber for the pile: the two-and-thirtieth in burning it; and
the three-and-thirtieth in the games. The scene is generally on the
sea-shore.

  Thus humbled in the dust, the pensive train
  Through the sad city mourn’d her hero slain.
  The body soil’d with dust, and black with gore,
  Lies on broad Hellespont’s resounding shore.
  The Grecians seek their ships, and clear the strand,
  All, but the martial Myrmidonian band:
  These yet assembled great Achilles holds,
  And the stern purpose of his mind unfolds:

  "Not yet, my brave companions of the war,
  Release your smoking coursers from the car;
  But, with his chariot each in order led,
  Perform due honours to Patroclus dead.
  Ere yet from rest or food we seek relief,
  Some rites remain, to glut our rage of grief."

  The troops obey’d; and thrice in order led(281)
  (Achilles first) their coursers round the dead;
  And thrice their sorrows and laments renew;
  Tears bathe their arms, and tears the sands bedew.
  For such a warrior Thetis aids their woe,
  Melts their strong hearts, and bids their eyes to flow.
  But chief, Pelides: thick-succeeding sighs
  Burst from his heart, and torrents from his eyes:
  His slaughtering hands, yet red with blood, he laid
  On his dead friend’s cold breast, and thus he said:

  "All hail, Patroclus! let thy honour’d ghost
  Hear, and rejoice on Pluto’s dreary coast;
  Behold! Achilles’ promise is complete;
  The bloody Hector stretch’d before thy feet.
  Lo! to the dogs his carcase I resign;
  And twelve sad victims, of the Trojan line,
  Sacred to vengeance, instant shall expire;
  Their lives effused around thy funeral pyre."

  Gloomy he said, and (horrible to view)
  Before the bier the bleeding Hector threw,
  Prone on the dust. The Myrmidons around
  Unbraced their armour, and the steeds unbound.
  All to Achilles’ sable ship repair,
  Frequent and full, the genial feast to share.
  Now from the well-fed swine black smokes aspire,
  The bristly victims hissing o’er the fire:
  The huge ox bellowing falls; with feebler cries
  Expires the goat; the sheep in silence dies.
  Around the hero’s prostrate body flow’d,
  In one promiscuous stream, the reeking blood.
  And now a band of Argive monarchs brings
  The glorious victor to the king of kings.
  From his dead friend the pensive warrior went,
  With steps unwilling, to the regal tent.
  The attending heralds, as by office bound,
  With kindled flames the tripod-vase surround:
  To cleanse his conquering hands from hostile gore,
  They urged in vain; the chief refused, and swore:(282)

  "No drop shall touch me, by almighty Jove!
  The first and greatest of the gods above!
  Till on the pyre I place thee; till I rear
  The grassy mound, and clip thy sacred hair.
  Some ease at least those pious rites may give,
  And soothe my sorrows, while I bear to live.
  Howe’er, reluctant as I am, I stay
  And share your feast; but with the dawn of day,
  (O king of men!) it claims thy royal care,
  That Greece the warrior’s funeral pile prepare,
  And bid the forests fall: (such rites are paid
  To heroes slumbering in eternal shade:)
  Then, when his earthly part shall mount in fire,
  Let the leagued squadrons to their posts retire."

  He spoke: they hear him, and the word obey;
  The rage of hunger and of thirst allay,
  Then ease in sleep the labours of the day.
  But great Pelides, stretch’d along the shore,
  Where, dash’d on rocks, the broken billows roar,
  Lies inly groaning; while on either hand
  The martial Myrmidons confusedly stand.
  Along the grass his languid members fall,
  Tired with his chase around the Trojan wall;
  Hush’d by the murmurs of the rolling deep,
  At length he sinks in the soft arms of sleep.
  When lo! the shade, before his closing eyes,
  Of sad Patroclus rose, or seem’d to rise:
  In the same robe he living wore, he came:
  In stature, voice, and pleasing look, the same.
  The form familiar hover’d o’er his head,
  "And sleeps Achilles? (thus the phantom said:)
  Sleeps my Achilles, his Patroclus dead?
  Living, I seem’d his dearest, tenderest care,
  But now forgot, I wander in the air.
  Let my pale corse the rites of burial know,
  And give me entrance in the realms below:
  Till then the spirit finds no resting-place,
  But here and there the unbodied spectres chase
  The vagrant dead around the dark abode,
  Forbid to cross the irremeable flood.
  Now give thy hand; for to the farther shore
  When once we pass, the soul returns no more:
  When once the last funereal flames ascend,
  No more shall meet Achilles and his friend;
  No more our thoughts to those we loved make known;
  Or quit the dearest, to converse alone.
  Me fate has sever’d from the sons of earth,
  The fate fore-doom’d that waited from my birth:
  Thee too it waits; before the Trojan wall
  Even great and godlike thou art doom’d to fall.
  Hear then; and as in fate and love we join,
  Ah suffer that my bones may rest with thine!
  Together have we lived; together bred,
  One house received us, and one table fed;
  That golden urn, thy goddess-mother gave,
  May mix our ashes in one common grave."

  "And is it thou? (he answers) To my sight(283)
  Once more return’st thou from the realms of night?
  O more than brother! Think each office paid,
  Whate’er can rest a discontented shade;
  But grant one last embrace, unhappy boy!
  Afford at least that melancholy joy."

  He said, and with his longing arms essay’d
  In vain to grasp the visionary shade!
  Like a thin smoke he sees the spirit fly,(284)
  And hears a feeble, lamentable cry.
  Confused he wakes; amazement breaks the bands
  Of golden sleep, and starting from the sands,
  Pensive he muses with uplifted hands:

  "’Tis true, ’tis certain; man, though dead, retains
  Part of himself; the immortal mind remains:
  The form subsists without the body’s aid,
  Aerial semblance, and an empty shade!
  This night my friend, so late in battle lost,
  Stood at my side, a pensive, plaintive ghost:
  Even now familiar, as in life, he came;
  Alas! how different! yet how like the same!"

  Thus while he spoke, each eye grew big with tears:
  And now the rosy-finger’d morn appears,
  Shows every mournful face with tears o’erspread,
  And glares on the pale visage of the dead.
  But Agamemnon, as the rites demand,
  With mules and waggons sends a chosen band
  To load the timber, and the pile to rear;
  A charge consign’d to Merion’s faithful care.
  With proper instruments they take the road,
  Axes to cut, and ropes to sling the load.
  First march the heavy mules, securely slow,
  O’er hills, o’er dales, o’er crags, o’er rocks they go:(285)
  Jumping, high o’er the shrubs of the rough ground,
  Rattle the clattering cars, and the shock’d axles bound
  But when arrived at Ida’s spreading woods,(286)
  (Fair Ida, water’d with descending floods,)
  Loud sounds the axe, redoubling strokes on strokes;
  On all sides round the forest hurls her oaks
  Headlong. Deep echoing groan the thickets brown;
  Then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down.
  The wood the Grecians cleave, prepared to burn;
  And the slow mules the same rough road return
  The sturdy woodmen equal burdens bore
  (Such charge was given them) to the sandy shore;
  There on the spot which great Achilles show’d,
  They eased their shoulders, and disposed the load;
  Circling around the place, where times to come
  Shall view Patroclus’ and Achilles’ tomb.
  The hero bids his martial troops appear
  High on their cars in all the pomp of war;
  Each in refulgent arms his limbs attires,
  All mount their chariots, combatants and squires.
  The chariots first proceed, a shining train;
  Then clouds of foot that smoke along the plain;
  Next these the melancholy band appear;
  Amidst, lay dead Patroclus on the bier;
  O’er all the corse their scattered locks they throw;
  Achilles next, oppress’d with mighty woe,
  Supporting with his hands the hero’s head,
  Bends o’er the extended body of the dead.
  Patroclus decent on the appointed ground
  They place, and heap the sylvan pile around.
  But great Achilles stands apart in prayer,
  And from his head divides the yellow hair;
  Those curling locks which from his youth he vow’d,(287)
  And sacred grew, to Sperchius’ honour’d flood:
  Then sighing, to the deep his locks he cast,
  And roll’d his eyes around the watery waste:

  "Sperchius! whose waves in mazy errors lost
  Delightful roll along my native coast!
  To whom we vainly vow’d, at our return,
  These locks to fall, and hecatombs to burn:
  Full fifty rams to bleed in sacrifice,
  Where to the day thy silver fountains rise,
  And where in shade of consecrated bowers
  Thy altars stand, perfumed with native flowers!
  So vow’d my father, but he vow’d in vain;
  No more Achilles sees his native plain;
  In that vain hope these hairs no longer grow,
  Patroclus bears them to the shades below."

  Thus o’er Patroclus while the hero pray’d,
  On his cold hand the sacred lock he laid.
  Once more afresh the Grecian sorrows flow:
  And now the sun had set upon their woe;
  But to the king of men thus spoke the chief:
  "Enough, Atrides! give the troops relief:
  Permit the mourning legions to retire,
  And let the chiefs alone attend the pyre;
  The pious care be ours, the dead to burn—"
  He said: the people to their ships return:
  While those deputed to inter the slain
  Heap with a rising pyramid the plain.(288)
  A hundred foot in length, a hundred wide,
  The growing structure spreads on every side;
  High on the top the manly corse they lay,
  And well-fed sheep and sable oxen slay:
  Achilles covered with their fat the dead,
  And the piled victims round the body spread;
  Then jars of honey, and of fragrant oil,
  Suspends around, low-bending o’er the pile.
  Four sprightly coursers, with a deadly groan
  Pour forth their lives, and on the pyre are thrown.
  Of nine large dogs, domestic at his board,
  Fall two, selected to attend their lord,
  Then last of all, and horrible to tell,
  Sad sacrifice! twelve Trojan captives fell.(289)
  On these the rage of fire victorious preys,
  Involves and joins them in one common blaze.
  Smear’d with the bloody rites, he stands on high,
  And calls the spirit with a dreadful cry:(290)

  "All hail, Patroclus! let thy vengeful ghost
  Hear, and exult, on Pluto’s dreary coast.
  Behold Achilles’ promise fully paid,
  Twelve Trojan heroes offer’d to thy shade;
  But heavier fates on Hector’s corse attend,
  Saved from the flames, for hungry dogs to rend."

  So spake he, threatening: but the gods made vain
  His threat, and guard inviolate the slain:
  Celestial Venus hover’d o’er his head,
  And roseate unguents, heavenly fragrance! shed:
  She watch’d him all the night and all the day,
  And drove the bloodhounds from their destined prey.
  Nor sacred Phoebus less employ’d his care;
  He pour’d around a veil of gather’d air,
  And kept the nerves undried, the flesh entire,
  Against the solar beam and Sirian fire.

              [Illustration: THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS.]

                      THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS.


  Nor yet the pile, where dead Patroclus lies,
  Smokes, nor as yet the sullen flames arise;
  But, fast beside, Achilles stood in prayer,
  Invoked the gods whose spirit moves the air,
  And victims promised, and libations cast,
  To gentle Zephyr and the Boreal blast:
  He call’d the aerial powers, along the skies
  To breathe, and whisper to the fires to rise.
  The winged Iris heard the hero’s call,
  And instant hasten’d to their airy hall,
  Where in old Zephyr’s open courts on high,
  Sat all the blustering brethren of the sky.
  She shone amidst them, on her painted bow;
  The rocky pavement glitter’d with the show.
  All from the banquet rise, and each invites
  The various goddess to partake the rites.
  "Not so (the dame replied), I haste to go
  To sacred Ocean, and the floods below:
  Even now our solemn hecatombs attend,
  And heaven is feasting on the world’s green end
  With righteous Ethiops (uncorrupted train!)
  Far on the extremest limits of the main.
  But Peleus’ son entreats, with sacrifice,
  The western spirit, and the north, to rise!
  Let on Patroclus’ pile your blast be driven,
  And bear the blazing honours high to heaven."

  Swift as the word she vanish’d from their view;
  Swift as the word the winds tumultuous flew;
  Forth burst the stormy band with thundering roar,
  And heaps on heaps the clouds are toss’d before.
  To the wide main then stooping from the skies,
  The heaving deeps in watery mountains rise:
  Troy feels the blast along her shaking walls,
  Till on the pile the gather’d tempest falls.
  The structure crackles in the roaring fires,
  And all the night the plenteous flame aspires.
  All night Achilles hails Patroclus’ soul,
  With large libations from the golden bowl.
  As a poor father, helpless and undone,
  Mourns o’er the ashes of an only son,
  Takes a sad pleasure the last bones to burn,
  And pours in tears, ere yet they close the urn:
  So stay’d Achilles, circling round the shore,
  So watch’d the flames, till now they flame no more.
  ’Twas when, emerging through the shades of night.
  The morning planet told the approach of light;
  And, fast behind, Aurora’s warmer ray
  O’er the broad ocean pour’d the golden day:
  Then sank the blaze, the pile no longer burn’d,
  And to their caves the whistling winds return’d:
  Across the Thracian seas their course they bore;
  The ruffled seas beneath their passage roar.

  Then parting from the pile he ceased to weep,
  And sank to quiet in the embrace of sleep,
  Exhausted with his grief: meanwhile the crowd
  Of thronging Grecians round Achilles stood;
  The tumult waked him: from his eyes he shook
  Unwilling slumber, and the chiefs bespoke:

  "Ye kings and princes of the Achaian name!
  First let us quench the yet remaining flame
  With sable wine; then, as the rites direct,
  The hero’s bones with careful view select:
  (Apart, and easy to be known they lie
  Amidst the heap, and obvious to the eye:
  The rest around the margin will be seen
  Promiscuous, steeds and immolated men:)
  These wrapp’d in double cauls of fat, prepare;
  And in the golden vase dispose with care;
  There let them rest with decent honour laid,
  Till I shall follow to the infernal shade.
  Meantime erect the tomb with pious hands,
  A common structure on the humble sands:
  Hereafter Greece some nobler work may raise,
  And late posterity record our praise!"

  The Greeks obey; where yet the embers glow,
  Wide o’er the pile the sable wine they throw,
  And deep subsides the ashy heap below.
  Next the white bones his sad companions place,
  With tears collected, in the golden vase.
  The sacred relics to the tent they bore;
  The urn a veil of linen covered o’er.
  That done, they bid the sepulchre aspire,
  And cast the deep foundations round the pyre;
  High in the midst they heap the swelling bed
  Of rising earth, memorial of the dead.

  The swarming populace the chief detains,
  And leads amidst a wide extent of plains;
  There placed them round: then from the ships proceeds
  A train of oxen, mules, and stately steeds,
  Vases and tripods (for the funeral games),
  Resplendent brass, and more resplendent dames.
  First stood the prizes to reward the force
  Of rapid racers in the dusty course:
  A woman for the first, in beauty’s bloom,
  Skill’d in the needle, and the labouring loom;
  And a large vase, where two bright handles rise,
  Of twenty measures its capacious size.
  The second victor claims a mare unbroke,
  Big with a mule, unknowing of the yoke:
  The third, a charger yet untouch’d by flame;
  Four ample measures held the shining frame:
  Two golden talents for the fourth were placed:
  An ample double bowl contents the last.
  These in fair order ranged upon the plain,
  The hero, rising, thus address’d the train:

  "Behold the prizes, valiant Greeks! decreed
  To the brave rulers of the racing steed;
  Prizes which none beside ourself could gain,
  Should our immortal coursers take the plain;
  (A race unrivall’d, which from ocean’s god
  Peleus received, and on his son bestow’d.)
  But this no time our vigour to display;
  Nor suit, with them, the games of this sad day:
  Lost is Patroclus now, that wont to deck
  Their flowing manes, and sleek their glossy neck.
  Sad, as they shared in human grief, they stand,
  And trail those graceful honours on the sand!
  Let others for the noble task prepare,
  Who trust the courser and the flying car."

  Fired at his word the rival racers rise;
  But far the first Eumelus hopes the prize,
  Famed though Pieria for the fleetest breed,
  And skill’d to manage the high-bounding steed.
  With equal ardour bold Tydides swell’d,
  The steeds of Tros beneath his yoke compell’d
  (Which late obey’d the Dardan chiefs command,
  When scarce a god redeem’d him from his hand).
  Then Menelaus his Podargus brings,
  And the famed courser of the king of kings:
  Whom rich Echepolus (more rich than brave),
  To ’scape the wars, to Agamemnon gave,
  (Æthe her name) at home to end his days;
  Base wealth preferring to eternal praise.
  Next him Antilochus demands the course
  With beating heart, and cheers his Pylian horse.
  Experienced Nestor gives his son the reins,
  Directs his judgment, and his heat restrains;
  Nor idly warns the hoary sire, nor hears
  The prudent son with unattending ears.

  "My son! though youthful ardour fire thy breast,
  The gods have loved thee, and with arts have bless’d;
  Neptune and Jove on thee conferr’d the skill
  Swift round the goal to turn the flying wheel.
  To guide thy conduct little precept needs;
  But slow, and past their vigour, are my steeds.
  Fear not thy rivals, though for swiftness known;
  Compare those rivals’ judgment and thy own:
  It is not strength, but art, obtains the prize,
  And to be swift is less than to be wise.
  ’Tis more by art than force of numerous strokes
  The dexterous woodman shapes the stubborn oaks;
  By art the pilot, through the boiling deep
  And howling tempest, steers the fearless ship;
  And ’tis the artist wins the glorious course;
  Not those who trust in chariots and in horse.
  In vain, unskilful to the goal they strive,
  And short, or wide, the ungovern’d courser drive:
  While with sure skill, though with inferior steeds,
  The knowing racer to his end proceeds;
  Fix’d on the goal his eye foreruns the course,
  His hand unerring steers the steady horse,
  And now contracts, or now extends the rein,
  Observing still the foremost on the plain.
  Mark then the goal, ’tis easy to be found;
  Yon aged trunk, a cubit from the ground;
  Of some once stately oak the last remains,
  Or hardy fir, unperish’d with the rains:
  Inclosed with stones, conspicuous from afar;
  And round, a circle for the wheeling car.
  (Some tomb perhaps of old, the dead to grace;
  Or then, as now, the limit of a race.)
  Bear close to this, and warily proceed,
  A little bending to the left-hand steed;
  But urge the right, and give him all the reins;
  While thy strict hand his fellow’s head restrains,
  And turns him short; till, doubling as they roll,
  The wheel’s round naves appear to brush the goal.
  Yet (not to break the car, or lame the horse)
  Clear of the stony heap direct the course;
  Lest through incaution failing, thou mayst be
  A joy to others, a reproach to me.
  So shalt thou pass the goal, secure of mind,
  And leave unskilful swiftness far behind:
  Though thy fierce rival drove the matchless steed
  Which bore Adrastus, of celestial breed;
  Or the famed race, through all the regions known,
  That whirl’d the car of proud Laomedon."

  Thus (nought unsaid) the much-advising sage
  Concludes; then sat, stiff with unwieldy age.
  Next bold Meriones was seen to rise,
  The last, but not least ardent for the prize.
  They mount their seats; the lots their place dispose
  (Roll’d in his helmet, these Achilles throws).
  Young Nestor leads the race: Eumelus then;
  And next the brother of the king of men:
  Thy lot, Meriones, the fourth was cast;
  And, far the bravest, Diomed, was last.
  They stand in order, an impatient train:
  Pelides points the barrier on the plain,
  And sends before old Phoenix to the place,
  To mark the racers, and to judge the race.
  At once the coursers from the barrier bound;
  The lifted scourges all at once resound;
  Their heart, their eyes, their voice, they send before;
  And up the champaign thunder from the shore:
  Thick, where they drive, the dusty clouds arise,
  And the lost courser in the whirlwind flies;
  Loose on their shoulders the long manes reclined,
  Float in their speed, and dance upon the wind:
  The smoking chariots, rapid as they bound,
  Now seem to touch the sky, and now the ground.
  While hot for fame, and conquest all their care,
  (Each o’er his flying courser hung in air,)
  Erect with ardour, poised upon the rein,
  They pant, they stretch, they shout along the plain.
  Now (the last compass fetch’d around the goal)
  At the near prize each gathers all his soul,
  Each burns with double hope, with double pain,
  Tears up the shore, and thunders toward the main.
  First flew Eumelus on Pheretian steeds;
  With those of Tros bold Diomed succeeds:
  Close on Eumelus’ back they puff the wind,
  And seem just mounting on his car behind;
  Full on his neck he feels the sultry breeze,
  And, hovering o’er, their stretching shadows sees.
  Then had he lost, or left a doubtful prize;
  But angry Phoebus to Tydides flies,
  Strikes from his hand the scourge, and renders vain
  His matchless horses’ labour on the plain.
  Rage fills his eye with anguish, to survey
  Snatch’d from his hope the glories of the day.
  The fraud celestial Pallas sees with pain,
  Springs to her knight, and gives the scourge again,
  And fills his steeds with vigour. At a stroke
  She breaks his rival’s chariot from the yoke:
  No more their way the startled horses held;
  The car reversed came rattling on the field;
  Shot headlong from his seat, beside the wheel,
  Prone on the dust the unhappy master fell;
  His batter’d face and elbows strike the ground;
  Nose, mouth, and front, one undistinguish’d wound:
  Grief stops his voice, a torrent drowns his eyes:
  Before him far the glad Tydides flies;
  Minerva’s spirit drives his matchless pace,
  And crowns him victor of the labour’d race.

  The next, though distant, Menelaus succeeds;
  While thus young Nestor animates his steeds:
  "Now, now, my generous pair, exert your force;
  Not that we hope to match Tydides’ horse,
  Since great Minerva wings their rapid way,
  And gives their lord the honours of the day;
  But reach Atrides! shall his mare outgo
  Your swiftness? vanquish’d by a female foe?
  Through your neglect, if lagging on the plain
  The last ignoble gift be all we gain,
  No more shall Nestor’s hand your food supply,
  The old man’s fury rises, and ye die.
  Haste then: yon narrow road, before our sight,
  Presents the occasion, could we use it right."

  Thus he. The coursers at their master’s threat
  With quicker steps the sounding champaign beat.
  And now Antilochus with nice survey
  Observes the compass of the hollow way.
  ’Twas where, by force of wintry torrents torn,
  Fast by the road a precipice was worn:
  Here, where but one could pass, to shun the throng
  The Spartan hero’s chariot smoked along.
  Close up the venturous youth resolves to keep,
  Still edging near, and bears him toward the steep.
  Atrides, trembling, casts his eye below,
  And wonders at the rashness of his foe.
  "Hold, stay your steeds—What madness thus to ride
  This narrow way! take larger field (he cried),
  Or both must fall."—Atrides cried in vain;
  He flies more fast, and throws up all the rein.
  Far as an able arm the disk can send,
  When youthful rivals their full force extend,
  So far, Antilochus! thy chariot flew
  Before the king: he, cautious, backward drew
  His horse compell’d; foreboding in his fears
  The rattling ruin of the clashing cars,
  The floundering coursers rolling on the plain,
  And conquest lost through frantic haste to gain.
  But thus upbraids his rival as he flies:
  "Go, furious youth! ungenerous and unwise!
  Go, but expect not I’ll the prize resign;
  Add perjury to fraud, and make it thine—"
  Then to his steeds with all his force he cries,
  "Be swift, be vigorous, and regain the prize!
  Your rivals, destitute of youthful force,
  With fainting knees shall labour in the course,
  And yield the glory yours."—The steeds obey;
  Already at their heels they wing their way,
  And seem already to retrieve the day.

  Meantime the Grecians in a ring beheld
  The coursers bounding o’er the dusty field.
  The first who mark’d them was the Cretan king;
  High on a rising ground, above the ring,
  The monarch sat: from whence with sure survey
  He well observed the chief who led the way,
  And heard from far his animating cries,
  And saw the foremost steed with sharpen’d eyes;
  On whose broad front a blaze of shining white,
  Like the full moon, stood obvious to the sight.
  He saw; and rising, to the Greeks begun:
  "Are yonder horse discern’d by me alone?
  Or can ye, all, another chief survey,
  And other steeds than lately led the way?
  Those, though the swiftest, by some god withheld,
  Lie sure disabled in the middle field:
  For, since the goal they doubled, round the plain
  I search to find them, but I search in vain.
  Perchance the reins forsook the driver’s hand,
  And, turn’d too short, he tumbled on the strand,
  Shot from the chariot; while his coursers stray
  With frantic fury from the destined way.
  Rise then some other, and inform my sight,
  For these dim eyes, perhaps, discern not right;
  Yet sure he seems, to judge by shape and air,
  The great Ætolian chief, renown’d in war."

  "Old man! (Oileus rashly thus replies)
  Thy tongue too hastily confers the prize;
  Of those who view the course, nor sharpest eyed,
  Nor youngest, yet the readiest to decide.
  Eumelus’ steeds, high bounding in the chase,
  Still, as at first, unrivall’d lead the race:
  I well discern him, as he shakes the rein,
  And hear his shouts victorious o’er the plain."

  Thus he. Idomeneus, incensed, rejoin’d:
  "Barbarous of words! and arrogant of mind!
  Contentious prince, of all the Greeks beside
  The last in merit, as the first in pride!
  To vile reproach what answer can we make?
  A goblet or a tripod let us stake,
  And be the king the judge. The most unwise
  Will learn their rashness, when they pay the price."

  He said: and Ajax, by mad passion borne,
  Stern had replied; fierce scorn enhancing scorn
  To fell extremes. But Thetis’ godlike son
  Awful amidst them rose, and thus begun:

  "Forbear, ye chiefs! reproachful to contend;
  Much would ye blame, should others thus offend:
  And lo! the approaching steeds your contest end."
  No sooner had he spoke, but thundering near,
  Drives, through a stream of dust, the charioteer.
  High o’er his head the circling lash he wields:
  His bounding horses scarcely touch the fields:
  His car amidst the dusty whirlwind roll’d,
  Bright with the mingled blaze of tin and gold,
  Refulgent through the cloud: no eye could find
  The track his flying wheels had left behind:
  And the fierce coursers urged their rapid pace
  So swift, it seem’d a flight, and not a race.
  Now victor at the goal Tydides stands,
  Quits his bright car, and springs upon the sands;
  From the hot steeds the sweaty torrents stream;
  The well-plied whip is hung athwart the beam:
  With joy brave Sthenelus receives the prize,
  The tripod-vase, and dame with radiant eyes:
  These to the ships his train triumphant leads,
  The chief himself unyokes the panting steeds.

  Young Nestor follows (who by art, not force,
  O’erpass’d Atrides) second in the course.
  Behind, Atrides urged the race, more near
  Than to the courser in his swift career
  The following car, just touching with his heel
  And brushing with his tail the whirling wheel:
  Such, and so narrow now the space between
  The rivals, late so distant on the green;
  So soon swift Æthe her lost ground regain’d,
  One length, one moment, had the race obtain’d.

  Merion pursued, at greater distance still,
  With tardier coursers, and inferior skill.
  Last came, Admetus! thy unhappy son;
  Slow dragged the steeds his batter’d chariot on:
  Achilles saw, and pitying thus begun:

  "Behold! the man whose matchless art surpass’d
  The sons of Greece! the ablest, yet the last!
  Fortune denies, but justice bids us pay
  (Since great Tydides bears the first away)
  To him the second honours of the day."

  The Greeks consent with loud-applauding cries,
  And then Eumelus had received the prize,
  But youthful Nestor, jealous of his fame,
  The award opposes, and asserts his claim.
  "Think not (he cries) I tamely will resign,
  O Peleus’ son! the mare so justly mine.
  What if the gods, the skilful to confound,
  Have thrown the horse and horseman to the ground?
  Perhaps he sought not heaven by sacrifice,
  And vows omitted forfeited the prize.
  If yet (distinction to thy friend to show,
  And please a soul desirous to bestow)
  Some gift must grace Eumelus, view thy store
  Of beauteous handmaids, steeds, and shining ore;
  An ample present let him thence receive,
  And Greece shall praise thy generous thirst to give.
  But this my prize I never shall forego;
  This, who but touches, warriors! is my foe."

  Thus spake the youth; nor did his words offend;
  Pleased with the well-turn’d flattery of a friend,
  Achilles smiled: "The gift proposed (he cried),
  Antilochus! we shall ourself provide.
  With plates of brass the corslet cover’d o’er,
  (The same renown’d Asteropaeus wore,)
  Whose glittering margins raised with silver shine,
  (No vulgar gift,) Eumelus! shall be thine."

  He said: Automedon at his command
  The corslet brought, and gave it to his hand.
  Distinguish’d by his friend, his bosom glows
  With generous joy: then Menelaus rose;
  The herald placed the sceptre in his hands,
  And still’d the clamour of the shouting bands.
  Not without cause incensed at Nestor’s son,
  And inly grieving, thus the king begun:

  "The praise of wisdom, in thy youth obtain’d,
  An act so rash, Antilochus! has stain’d.
  Robb’d of my glory and my just reward,
  To you, O Grecians! be my wrong declared:
  So not a leader shall our conduct blame,
  Or judge me envious of a rival’s fame.
  But shall not we, ourselves, the truth maintain?
  What needs appealing in a fact so plain?
  What Greek shall blame me, if I bid thee rise,
  And vindicate by oath th’ ill-gotten prize?
  Rise if thou darest, before thy chariot stand,
  The driving scourge high-lifted in thy hand;
  And touch thy steeds, and swear thy whole intent
  Was but to conquer, not to circumvent.
  Swear by that god whose liquid arms surround
  The globe, and whose dread earthquakes heave the ground!"

  The prudent chief with calm attention heard;
  Then mildly thus: "Excuse, if youth have err’d;
  Superior as thou art, forgive the offence,
  Nor I thy equal, or in years, or sense.
  Thou know’st the errors of unripen’d age,
  Weak are its counsels, headlong is its rage.
  The prize I quit, if thou thy wrath resign;
  The mare, or aught thou ask’st, be freely thine
  Ere I become (from thy dear friendship torn)
  Hateful to thee, and to the gods forsworn."

  So spoke Antilochus; and at the word
  The mare contested to the king restored.
  Joy swells his soul: as when the vernal grain
  Lifts the green ear above the springing plain,
  The fields their vegetable life renew,
  And laugh and glitter with the morning dew;
  Such joy the Spartan’s shining face o’erspread,
  And lifted his gay heart, while thus he said:

  "Still may our souls, O generous youth! agree
  ’Tis now Atrides’ turn to yield to thee.
  Rash heat perhaps a moment might control,
  Not break, the settled temper of thy soul.
  Not but (my friend) ’tis still the wiser way
  To waive contention with superior sway;
  For ah! how few, who should like thee offend,
  Like thee, have talents to regain the friend!
  To plead indulgence, and thy fault atone,
  Suffice thy father’s merit and thy own:
  Generous alike, for me, the sire and son
  Have greatly suffer’d, and have greatly done.
  I yield; that all may know, my soul can bend,
  Nor is my pride preferr’d before my friend."

  He said; and pleased his passion to command,
  Resign’d the courser to Noemon’s hand,
  Friend of the youthful chief: himself content,
  The shining charger to his vessel sent.
  The golden talents Merion next obtain’d;
  The fifth reward, the double bowl, remain’d.
  Achilles this to reverend Nestor bears.
  And thus the purpose of his gift declares:
  "Accept thou this, O sacred sire! (he said)
  In dear memorial of Patroclus dead;
  Dead and for ever lost Patroclus lies,
  For ever snatch’d from our desiring eyes!
  Take thou this token of a grateful heart,
  Though ’tis not thine to hurl the distant dart,
  The quoit to toss, the ponderous mace to wield,
  Or urge the race, or wrestle on the field:
  Thy pristine vigour age has overthrown,
  But left the glory of the past thy own."

  He said, and placed the goblet at his side;
  With joy the venerable king replied:

  "Wisely and well, my son, thy words have proved
  A senior honour’d, and a friend beloved!
  Too true it is, deserted of my strength,
  These wither’d arms and limbs have fail’d at length.
  Oh! had I now that force I felt of yore,
  Known through Buprasium and the Pylian shore!
  Victorious then in every solemn game,
  Ordain’d to Amarynces’ mighty name;
  The brave Epeians gave my glory way,
  Ætolians, Pylians, all resign’d the day.
  I quell’d Clytomedes in fights of hand,
  And backward hurl’d Ancaeus on the sand,
  Surpass’d Iphyclus in the swift career,
  Phyleus and Polydorus with the spear.
  The sons of Actor won the prize of horse,
  But won by numbers, not by art or force:
  For the famed twins, impatient to survey
  Prize after prize by Nestor borne away,
  Sprung to their car; and with united pains
  One lash’d the coursers, while one ruled the reins.
  Such once I was! Now to these tasks succeeds
  A younger race, that emulate our deeds:
  I yield, alas! (to age who must not yield?)
  Though once the foremost hero of the field.
  Go thou, my son! by generous friendship led,
  With martial honours decorate the dead:
  While pleased I take the gift thy hands present,
  (Pledge of benevolence, and kind intent,)
  Rejoiced, of all the numerous Greeks, to see
  Not one but honours sacred age and me:
  Those due distinctions thou so well canst pay,
  May the just gods return another day!"

  Proud of the gift, thus spake the full of days:
  Achilles heard him, prouder of the praise.

  The prizes next are order’d to the field,
  For the bold champions who the caestus wield.
  A stately mule, as yet by toils unbroke,
  Of six years’ age, unconscious of the yoke,
  Is to the circus led, and firmly bound;
  Next stands a goblet, massy, large, and round.
  Achilles rising, thus: "Let Greece excite
  Two heroes equal to this hardy fight;
  Who dare the foe with lifted arms provoke,
  And rush beneath the long-descending stroke.
  On whom Apollo shall the palm bestow,
  And whom the Greeks supreme by conquest know,
  This mule his dauntless labours shall repay,
  The vanquish’d bear the massy bowl away."

  This dreadful combat great Epeus chose;(291)
  High o’er the crowd, enormous bulk! he rose,
  And seized the beast, and thus began to say:
  "Stand forth some man, to bear the bowl away!
  (Price of his ruin: for who dares deny
  This mule my right; the undoubted victor I)
  Others, ’tis own’d, in fields of battle shine,
  But the first honours of this fight are mine;
  For who excels in all? Then let my foe
  Draw near, but first his certain fortune know;
  Secure this hand shall his whole frame confound,
  Mash all his bones, and all his body pound:
  So let his friends be nigh, a needful train,
  To heave the batter’d carcase off the plain."

  The giant spoke; and in a stupid gaze
  The host beheld him, silent with amaze!
  ’Twas thou, Euryalus! who durst aspire
  To meet his might, and emulate thy sire,
  The great Mecistheus; who in days of yore
  In Theban games the noblest trophy bore,
  (The games ordain’d dead OEdipus to grace,)
  And singly vanquish the Cadmean race.
  Him great Tydides urges to contend,
  Warm with the hopes of conquest for his friend;
  Officious with the cincture girds him round;
  And to his wrist the gloves of death are bound.
  Amid the circle now each champion stands,
  And poises high in air his iron hands;
  With clashing gauntlets now they fiercely close,
  Their crackling jaws re-echo to the blows,
  And painful sweat from all their members flows.
  At length Epeus dealt a weighty blow
  Full on the cheek of his unwary foe;
  Beneath that ponderous arm’s resistless sway
  Down dropp’d he, nerveless, and extended lay.
  As a large fish, when winds and waters roar,
  By some huge billow dash’d against the shore,
  Lies panting; not less batter’d with his wound,
  The bleeding hero pants upon the ground.
  To rear his fallen foe, the victor lends,
  Scornful, his hand; and gives him to his friends;
  Whose arms support him, reeling through the throng,
  And dragging his disabled legs along;
  Nodding, his head hangs down his shoulder o’er;
  His mouth and nostrils pour the clotted gore;(292)
  Wrapp’d round in mists he lies, and lost to thought;
  His friends receive the bowl, too dearly bought.

  The third bold game Achilles next demands,
  And calls the wrestlers to the level sands:
  A massy tripod for the victor lies,
  Of twice six oxen its reputed price;
  And next, the loser’s spirits to restore,
  A female captive, valued but at four.
  Scarce did the chief the vigorous strife prop
  When tower-like Ajax and Ulysses rose.
  Amid the ring each nervous rival stands,
  Embracing rigid with implicit hands.
  Close lock’d above, their heads and arms are mix’d:
  Below, their planted feet at distance fix’d;
  Like two strong rafters which the builder forms,
  Proof to the wintry winds and howling storms,
  Their tops connected, but at wider space
  Fix’d on the centre stands their solid base.
  Now to the grasp each manly body bends;
  The humid sweat from every pore descends;
  Their bones resound with blows: sides, shoulders, thighs
  Swell to each gripe, and bloody tumours rise.
  Nor could Ulysses, for his art renown’d,
  O’erturn the strength of Ajax on the ground;
  Nor could the strength of Ajax overthrow
  The watchful caution of his artful foe.
  While the long strife even tired the lookers on,
  Thus to Ulysses spoke great Telamon:
  "Or let me lift thee, chief, or lift thou me:
  Prove we our force, and Jove the rest decree."

  He said; and, straining, heaved him off the ground
  With matchless strength; that time Ulysses found
  The strength to evade, and where the nerves combine
  His ankle struck: the giant fell supine;
  Ulysses, following, on his bosom lies;
  Shouts of applause run rattling through the skies.
  Ajax to lift Ulysses next essays;
  He barely stirr’d him, but he could not raise:
  His knee lock’d fast, the foe’s attempt denied;
  And grappling close, they tumbled side by side.
  Defiled with honourable dust they roll,
  Still breathing strife, and unsubdued of soul:
  Again they rage, again to combat rise;
  When great Achilles thus divides the prize:

  "Your noble vigour, O my friends, restrain;
  Nor weary out your generous strength in vain.
  Ye both have won: let others who excel,
  Now prove that prowess you have proved so well."

  The hero’s words the willing chiefs obey,
  From their tired bodies wipe the dust away,
  And, clothed anew, the following games survey.

  And now succeed the gifts ordain’d to grace
  The youths contending in the rapid race:
  A silver urn that full six measures held,
  By none in weight or workmanship excell’d:
  Sidonian artists taught the frame to shine,
  Elaborate, with artifice divine;
  Whence Tyrian sailors did the prize transport,
  And gave to Thoas at the Lemnian port:
  From him descended, good Eunaeus heir’d
  The glorious gift; and, for Lycaon spared,
  To brave Patroclus gave the rich reward:
  Now, the same hero’s funeral rites to grace,
  It stands the prize of swiftness in the race.
  A well-fed ox was for the second placed;
  And half a talent must content the last.
  Achilles rising then bespoke the train:
  "Who hope the palm of swiftness to obtain,
  Stand forth, and bear these prizes from the plain."

  The hero said, and starting from his place,
  Oilean Ajax rises to the race;
  Ulysses next; and he whose speed surpass’d
  His youthful equals, Nestor’s son, the last.
  Ranged in a line the ready racers stand;
  Pelides points the barrier with his hand;
  All start at once; Oileus led the race;
  The next Ulysses, measuring pace with pace;
  Behind him, diligently close, he sped,
  As closely following as the running thread
  The spindle follows, and displays the charms
  Of the fair spinster’s breast and moving arms:
  Graceful in motion thus, his foe he plies,
  And treads each footstep ere the dust can rise;
  His glowing breath upon his shoulders plays:
  The admiring Greeks loud acclamations raise:
  To him they give their wishes, hearts, and eyes,
  And send their souls before him as he flies.
  Now three times turn’d in prospect of the goal,
  The panting chief to Pallas lifts his soul:
  "Assist, O goddess!" thus in thought he pray’d!
  And present at his thought descends the maid.
  Buoy’d by her heavenly force, he seems to swim,
  And feels a pinion lifting every limb.
  All fierce, and ready now the prize to gain,
  Unhappy Ajax stumbles on the plain
  (O’erturn’d by Pallas), where the slippery shore
  Was clogg’d with slimy dung and mingled gore.
  (The self-same place beside Patroclus’ pyre,
  Where late the slaughter’d victims fed the fire.)
  Besmear’d with filth, and blotted o’er with clay,
  Obscene to sight, the rueful racer lay;
  The well-fed bull (the second prize) he shared,
  And left the urn Ulysses’ rich reward.
  Then, grasping by the horn the mighty beast,
  The baffled hero thus the Greeks address’d:

  "Accursed fate! the conquest I forego;
  A mortal I, a goddess was my foe;
  She urged her favourite on the rapid way,
  And Pallas, not Ulysses, won the day."

  Thus sourly wail’d he, sputtering dirt and gore;
  A burst of laughter echoed through the shore.
  Antilochus, more humorous than the rest,
  Takes the last prize, and takes it with a jest:

  "Why with our wiser elders should we strive?
  The gods still love them, and they always thrive.
  Ye see, to Ajax I must yield the prize:
  He to Ulysses, still more aged and wise;
  (A green old age unconscious of decays,
  That proves the hero born in better days!)
  Behold his vigour in this active race!
  Achilles only boasts a swifter pace:
  For who can match Achilles? He who can,
  Must yet be more than hero, more than man."

  The effect succeeds the speech. Pelides cries,
  "Thy artful praise deserves a better prize.
  Nor Greece in vain shall hear thy friend extoll’d;
  Receive a talent of the purest gold."
  The youth departs content. The host admire
  The son of Nestor, worthy of his sire.

  Next these a buckler, spear, and helm, he brings;
  Cast on the plain, the brazen burden rings:
  Arms which of late divine Sarpedon wore,
  And great Patroclus in short triumph bore.
  "Stand forth the bravest of our host! (he cries)
  Whoever dares deserve so rich a prize,
  Now grace the lists before our army’s sight,
  And sheathed in steel, provoke his foe to fight.
  Who first the jointed armour shall explore,
  And stain his rival’s mail with issuing gore,
  The sword Asteropaeus possess’d of old,
  (A Thracian blade, distinct with studs of gold,)
  Shall pay the stroke, and grace the striker’s side:
  These arms in common let the chiefs divide:
  For each brave champion, when the combat ends,
  A sumptuous banquet at our tents attends."

  Fierce at the word uprose great Tydeus’ son,
  And the huge bulk of Ajax Telamon.
  Clad in refulgent steel, on either hand,
  The dreadful chiefs amid the circle stand;
  Louring they meet, tremendous to the sight;
  Each Argive bosom beats with fierce delight.
  Opposed in arms not long they idly stood,
  But thrice they closed, and thrice the charge renew’d.
  A furious pass the spear of Ajax made
  Through the broad shield, but at the corslet stay’d.
  Not thus the foe: his javelin aim’d above
  The buckler’s margin, at the neck he drove.
  But Greece, now trembling for her hero’s life,
  Bade share the honours, and surcease the strife.
  Yet still the victor’s due Tydides gains,
  With him the sword and studded belt remains.

  Then hurl’d the hero, thundering on the ground,
  A mass of iron (an enormous round),
  Whose weight and size the circling Greeks admire,
  Rude from the furnace, and but shaped by fire.
  This mighty quoit Aetion wont to rear,
  And from his whirling arm dismiss in air;
  The giant by Achilles slain, he stow’d
  Among his spoils this memorable load.
  For this, he bids those nervous artists vie,
  That teach the disk to sound along the sky.
  "Let him, whose might can hurl this bowl, arise;
  Who farthest hurls it, take it as his prize;
  If he be one enrich’d with large domain
  Of downs for flocks, and arable for grain,
  Small stock of iron needs that man provide;
  His hinds and swains whole years shall be supplied
  From hence; nor ask the neighbouring city’s aid
  For ploughshares, wheels, and all the rural trade."

  Stern Polypoetes stepp’d before the throng,
  And great Leonteus, more than mortal strong;
  Whose force with rival forces to oppose,
  Uprose great Ajax; up Epeus rose.
  Each stood in order: first Epeus threw;
  High o’er the wondering crowds the whirling circle flew.
  Leonteus next a little space surpass’d;
  And third, the strength of godlike Ajax cast.
  O’er both their marks it flew; till fiercely flung
  From Polypoetes’ arm the discus sung:
  Far as a swain his whirling sheephook throws,
  That distant falls among the grazing cows,
  So past them all the rapid circle flies:
  His friends, while loud applauses shake the skies,
  With force conjoin’d heave off the weighty prize.

  Those, who in skilful archery contend,
  He next invites the twanging bow to bend;
  And twice ten axes casts amidst the round,
  Ten double-edged, and ten that singly wound
  The mast, which late a first-rate galley bore,
  The hero fixes in the sandy shore;
  To the tall top a milk-white dove they tie,
  The trembling mark at which their arrows fly.

  "Whose weapon strikes yon fluttering bird, shall bear
  These two-edged axes, terrible in war;
  The single, he whose shaft divides the cord."
  He said: experienced Merion took the word;
  And skilful Teucer: in the helm they threw
  Their lots inscribed, and forth the latter flew.
  Swift from the string the sounding arrow flies;
  But flies unbless’d! No grateful sacrifice,
  No firstling lambs, unheedful! didst thou vow
  To Phoebus, patron of the shaft and bow.
  For this, thy well-aim’d arrow turn’d aside,
  Err’d from the dove, yet cut the cord that tied:
  Adown the mainmast fell the parted string,
  And the free bird to heaven displays her wing:
  Sea, shores, and skies, with loud applause resound,
  And Merion eager meditates the wound:
  He takes the bow, directs the shaft above,
  And following with his eye the soaring dove,
  Implores the god to speed it through the skies,
  With vows of firstling lambs, and grateful sacrific
  The dove, in airy circles as she wheels,
  Amid the clouds the piercing arrow feels;
  Quite through and through the point its passage found,
  And at his feet fell bloody to the ground.
  The wounded bird, ere yet she breathed her last,
  With flagging wings alighted on the mast,
  A moment hung, and spread her pinions there,
  Then sudden dropp’d, and left her life in air.
  From the pleased crowd new peals of thunder rise,
  And to the ships brave Merion bears the prize.

  To close the funeral games, Achilles last
  A massy spear amid the circle placed,
  And ample charger of unsullied frame,
  With flowers high-wrought, not blacken’d yet by flame.
  For these he bids the heroes prove their art,
  Whose dexterous skill directs the flying dart.
  Here too great Merion hopes the noble prize;
  Nor here disdain’d the king of men to rise.
  With joy Pelides saw the honour paid,
  Rose to the monarch, and respectful said:

  "Thee first in virtue, as in power supreme,
  O king of nations! all thy Greeks proclaim;
  In every martial game thy worth attest,
  And know thee both their greatest and their best.
  Take then the prize, but let brave Merion bear
  This beamy javelin in thy brother’s war."

  Pleased from the hero’s lips his praise to hear,
  The king to Merion gives the brazen spear:
  But, set apart for sacred use, commands
  The glittering charger to Talthybius’ hands.

                          [Illustration: CERES.]

                                  CERES.





BOOK XXIV.


ARGUMENT.

THE REDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOR.

The gods deliberate about the redemption of Hector’s body. Jupiter sends
Thetis to Achilles, to dispose him for the restoring it, and Iris to
Priam, to encourage him to go in person and treat for it. The old king,
notwithstanding the remonstrances of his queen, makes ready for the
journey, to which he is encouraged by an omen from Jupiter. He sets forth
in his chariot, with a waggon loaded with presents, under the charge of
Idaeus the herald. Mercury descends in the shape of a young man, and
conducts him to the pavilion of Achilles. Their conversation on the way.
Priam finds Achilles at his table, casts himself at his feet, and begs for
the body of his son: Achilles, moved with compassion, grants his request,
detains him one night in his tent, and the next morning sends him home
with the body: the Trojans run out to meet him. The lamentations of
Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, with the solemnities of the funeral.

The time of twelve days is employed in this book, while the body of Hector
lies in the tent of Achilles; and as many more are spent in the truce
allowed for his interment. The scene is partly in Achilles’ camp, and
partly in Troy.

  Now from the finish’d games the Grecian band
  Seek their black ships, and clear the crowded strand,
  All stretch’d at ease the genial banquet share,
  And pleasing slumbers quiet all their care.
  Not so Achilles: he, to grief resign’d,
  His friend’s dear image present to his mind,
  Takes his sad couch, more unobserved to weep;
  Nor tastes the gifts of all-composing sleep.
  Restless he roll’d around his weary bed,
  And all his soul on his Patroclus fed:
  The form so pleasing, and the heart so kind,
  That youthful vigour, and that manly mind,
  What toils they shared, what martial works they wrought,
  What seas they measured, and what fields they fought;
  All pass’d before him in remembrance dear,
  Thought follows thought, and tear succeeds to tear.
  And now supine, now prone, the hero lay,
  Now shifts his side, impatient for the day:
  Then starting up, disconsolate he goes
  Wide on the lonely beach to vent his woes.
  There as the solitary mourner raves,
  The ruddy morning rises o’er the waves:
  Soon as it rose, his furious steeds he join’d!
  The chariot flies, and Hector trails behind.
  And thrice, Patroclus! round thy monument
  Was Hector dragg’d, then hurried to the tent.
  There sleep at last o’ercomes the hero’s eyes;
  While foul in dust the unhonour’d carcase lies,
  But not deserted by the pitying skies:
  For Phoebus watch’d it with superior care,
  Preserved from gaping wounds and tainting air;
  And, ignominious as it swept the field,
  Spread o’er the sacred corse his golden shield.
  All heaven was moved, and Hermes will’d to go
  By stealth to snatch him from the insulting foe:
  But Neptune this, and Pallas this denies,
  And th’ unrelenting empress of the skies,
  E’er since that day implacable to Troy,
  What time young Paris, simple shepherd boy,
  Won by destructive lust (reward obscene),
  Their charms rejected for the Cyprian queen.
  But when the tenth celestial morning broke,
  To heaven assembled, thus Apollo spoke:

          [Illustration: HECTOR’S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES.]

                  HECTOR’S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES.


  "Unpitying powers! how oft each holy fane
  Has Hector tinged with blood of victims slain?
  And can ye still his cold remains pursue?
  Still grudge his body to the Trojans’ view?
  Deny to consort, mother, son, and sire,
  The last sad honours of a funeral fire?
  Is then the dire Achilles all your care?
  That iron heart, inflexibly severe;
  A lion, not a man, who slaughters wide,
  In strength of rage, and impotence of pride;
  Who hastes to murder with a savage joy,
  Invades around, and breathes but to destroy!
  Shame is not of his soul; nor understood,
  The greatest evil and the greatest good.
  Still for one loss he rages unresign’d,
  Repugnant to the lot of all mankind;
  To lose a friend, a brother, or a son,
  Heaven dooms each mortal, and its will is done:
  Awhile they sorrow, then dismiss their care;
  Fate gives the wound, and man is born to bear.
  But this insatiate, the commission given
  By fate exceeds, and tempts the wrath of heaven:
  Lo, how his rage dishonest drags along
  Hector’s dead earth, insensible of wrong!
  Brave though he be, yet by no reason awed,
  He violates the laws of man and god."

                  [Illustration: THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.]

                          THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.


  "If equal honours by the partial skies
  Are doom’d both heroes, (Juno thus replies,)
  If Thetis’ son must no distinction know,
  Then hear, ye gods! the patron of the bow.
  But Hector only boasts a mortal claim,
  His birth deriving from a mortal dame:
  Achilles, of your own ethereal race,
  Springs from a goddess by a man’s embrace
  (A goddess by ourself to Peleus given,
  A man divine, and chosen friend of heaven)
  To grace those nuptials, from the bright abode
  Yourselves were present; where this minstrel-god,
  Well pleased to share the feast, amid the quire
  Stood proud to hymn, and tune his youthful lyre."

  Then thus the Thunderer checks the imperial dame:
  "Let not thy wrath the court of heaven inflame;
  Their merits, nor their honours, are the same.
  But mine, and every god’s peculiar grace
  Hector deserves, of all the Trojan race:
  Still on our shrines his grateful offerings lay,
  (The only honours men to gods can pay,)
  Nor ever from our smoking altar ceased
  The pure libation, and the holy feast:
  Howe’er by stealth to snatch the corse away,
  We will not: Thetis guards it night and day.
  But haste, and summon to our courts above
  The azure queen; let her persuasion move
  Her furious son from Priam to receive
  The proffer’d ransom, and the corse to leave."

  He added not: and Iris from the skies,
  Swift as a whirlwind, on the message flies,
  Meteorous the face of ocean sweeps,
  Refulgent gliding o’er the sable deeps.
  Between where Samos wide his forests spreads,
  And rocky Imbrus lifts its pointed heads,
  Down plunged the maid; (the parted waves resound;)
  She plunged and instant shot the dark profound.
  As bearing death in the fallacious bait,
  From the bent angle sinks the leaden weight;
  So pass’d the goddess through the closing wave,
  Where Thetis sorrow’d in her secret cave:
  There placed amidst her melancholy train
  (The blue-hair’d sisters of the sacred main)
  Pensive she sat, revolving fates to come,
  And wept her godlike son’s approaching doom.
  Then thus the goddess of the painted bow:
  "Arise, O Thetis! from thy seats below,
  ’Tis Jove that calls."—"And why (the dame replies)
  Calls Jove his Thetis to the hated skies?
  Sad object as I am for heavenly sight!
  Ah may my sorrows ever shun the light!
  Howe’er, be heaven’s almighty sire obey’d—"
  She spake, and veil’d her head in sable shade,
  Which, flowing long, her graceful person clad;
  And forth she paced, majestically sad.

  Then through the world of waters they repair
  (The way fair Iris led) to upper air.
  The deeps dividing, o’er the coast they rise,
  And touch with momentary flight the skies.
  There in the lightning’s blaze the sire they found,
  And all the gods in shining synod round.
  Thetis approach’d with anguish in her face,
  (Minerva rising, gave the mourner place,)
  Even Juno sought her sorrows to console,
  And offer’d from her hand the nectar-bowl:
  She tasted, and resign’d it: then began
  The sacred sire of gods and mortal man:

  "Thou comest, fair Thetis, but with grief o’ercast;
  Maternal sorrows; long, ah, long to last!
  Suffice, we know and we partake thy cares;
  But yield to fate, and hear what Jove declares
  Nine days are past since all the court above
  In Hector’s cause have moved the ear of Jove;
  ’Twas voted, Hermes from his godlike foe
  By stealth should bear him, but we will’d not so:
  We will, thy son himself the corse restore,
  And to his conquest add this glory more.
  Then hie thee to him, and our mandate bear:
  Tell him he tempts the wrath of heaven too far;
  Nor let him more (our anger if he dread)
  Vent his mad vengeance on the sacred dead;
  But yield to ransom and the father’s prayer;
  The mournful father, Iris shall prepare
  With gifts to sue; and offer to his hands
  Whate’er his honour asks, or heart demands."

  His word the silver-footed queen attends,
  And from Olympus’ snowy tops descends.
  Arrived, she heard the voice of loud lament,
  And echoing groans that shook the lofty tent:
  His friends prepare the victim, and dispose
  Repast unheeded, while he vents his woes;
  The goddess seats her by her pensive son,
  She press’d his hand, and tender thus begun:

  "How long, unhappy! shall thy sorrows flow,
  And thy heart waste with life-consuming woe:
  Mindless of food, or love, whose pleasing reign
  Soothes weary life, and softens human pain?
  O snatch the moments yet within thy power;
  Not long to live, indulge the amorous hour!
  Lo! Jove himself (for Jove’s command I bear)
  Forbids to tempt the wrath of heaven too far.
  No longer then (his fury if thou dread)
  Detain the relics of great Hector dead;
  Nor vent on senseless earth thy vengeance vain,
  But yield to ransom, and restore the slain."

  To whom Achilles: "Be the ransom given,
  And we submit, since such the will of heaven."

  While thus they communed, from the Olympian bowers
  Jove orders Iris to the Trojan towers:
  "Haste, winged goddess! to the sacred town,
  And urge her monarch to redeem his son.
  Alone the Ilian ramparts let him leave,
  And bear what stern Achilles may receive:
  Alone, for so we will; no Trojan near
  Except, to place the dead with decent care,
  Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
  May the slow mules and funeral car command.
  Nor let him death, nor let him danger dread,
  Safe through the foe by our protection led:
  Him Hermes to Achilles shall convey,
  Guard of his life, and partner of his way.
  Fierce as he is, Achilles’ self shall spare
  His age, nor touch one venerable hair:
  Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
  Some sense of duty, some desire to save."

     [Illustration: IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.]

             IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.


  Then down her bow the winged Iris drives,
  And swift at Priam’s mournful court arrives:
  Where the sad sons beside their father’s throne
  Sat bathed in tears, and answer’d groan with groan.
  And all amidst them lay the hoary sire,
  (Sad scene of woe!) his face his wrapp’d attire
  Conceal’d from sight; with frantic hands he spread
  A shower of ashes o’er his neck and head.
  From room to room his pensive daughters roam;
  Whose shrieks and clamours fill the vaulted dome;
  Mindful of those, who late their pride and joy,
  Lie pale and breathless round the fields of Troy!
  Before the king Jove’s messenger appears,
  And thus in whispers greets his trembling ears:

  "Fear not, O father! no ill news I bear;
  From Jove I come, Jove makes thee still his care;
  For Hector’s sake these walls he bids thee leave,
  And bear what stern Achilles may receive;
  Alone, for so he wills; no Trojan near,
  Except, to place the dead with decent care,
  Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
  May the slow mules and funeral car command.
  Nor shalt thou death, nor shall thou danger dread:
  Safe through the foe by his protection led:
  Thee Hermes to Pelides shall convey,
  Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way.
  Fierce as he is, Achilles’ self shall spare
  Thy age, nor touch one venerable hair;
  Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
  Some sense of duty, some desire to save."

  She spoke, and vanish’d. Priam bids prepare
  His gentle mules and harness to the car;
  There, for the gifts, a polish’d casket lay:
  His pious sons the king’s command obey.
  Then pass’d the monarch to his bridal-room,
  Where cedar-beams the lofty roofs perfume,
  And where the treasures of his empire lay;
  Then call’d his queen, and thus began to say:

  "Unhappy consort of a king distress’d!
  Partake the troubles of thy husband’s breast:
  I saw descend the messenger of Jove,
  Who bids me try Achilles’ mind to move;
  Forsake these ramparts, and with gifts obtain
  The corse of Hector, at yon navy slain.
  Tell me thy thought: my heart impels to go
  Through hostile camps, and bears me to the foe."

  The hoary monarch thus. Her piercing cries
  Sad Hecuba renews, and then replies:
  "Ah! whither wanders thy distemper’d mind?
  And where the prudence now that awed mankind?
  Through Phrygia once and foreign regions known;
  Now all confused, distracted, overthrown!
  Singly to pass through hosts of foes! to face
  (O heart of steel!) the murderer of thy race!
  To view that deathful eye, and wander o’er
  Those hands yet red with Hector’s noble gore!
  Alas! my lord! he knows not how to spare.
  And what his mercy, thy slain sons declare;
  So brave! so many fallen! To claim his rage
  Vain were thy dignity, and vain thy age.
  No—pent in this sad palace, let us give
  To grief the wretched days we have to live.
  Still, still for Hector let our sorrows flow,
  Born to his own, and to his parents’ woe!
  Doom’d from the hour his luckless life begun,
  To dogs, to vultures, and to Peleus’ son!
  Oh! in his dearest blood might I allay
  My rage, and these barbarities repay!
  For ah! could Hector merit thus, whose breath
  Expired not meanly, in unactive death?
  He poured his latest blood in manly fight,
  And fell a hero in his country’s right."

  "Seek not to stay me, nor my soul affright
  With words of omen, like a bird of night,
  (Replied unmoved the venerable man;)
  ’Tis heaven commands me, and you urge in vain.
  Had any mortal voice the injunction laid,
  Nor augur, priest, nor seer, had been obey’d.
  A present goddess brought the high command,
  I saw, I heard her, and the word shall stand.
  I go, ye gods! obedient to your call:
  If in yon camp your powers have doom’d my fall,
  Content—By the same hand let me expire!
  Add to the slaughter’d son the wretched sire!
  One cold embrace at least may be allow’d,
  And my last tears flow mingled with his blood!"

  From forth his open’d stores, this said, he drew
  Twelve costly carpets of refulgent hue,
  As many vests, as many mantles told,
  And twelve fair veils, and garments stiff with gold,
  Two tripods next, and twice two chargers shine,
  With ten pure talents from the richest mine;
  And last a large well-labour’d bowl had place,
  (The pledge of treaties once with friendly Thrace:)
  Seem’d all too mean the stores he could employ,
  For one last look to buy him back to Troy!

  Lo! the sad father, frantic with his pain,
  Around him furious drives his menial train:
  In vain each slave with duteous care attends,
  Each office hurts him, and each face offends.
  "What make ye here, officious crowds! (he cries).
  Hence! nor obtrude your anguish on my eyes.
  Have ye no griefs at home, to fix ye there:
  Am I the only object of despair?
  Am I become my people’s common show,
  Set up by Jove your spectacle of woe?
  No, you must feel him too; yourselves must fall;
  The same stern god to ruin gives you all:
  Nor is great Hector lost by me alone;
  Your sole defence, your guardian power is gone!
  I see your blood the fields of Phrygia drown,
  I see the ruins of your smoking town!
  O send me, gods! ere that sad day shall come,
  A willing ghost to Pluto’s dreary dome!"

  He said, and feebly drives his friends away:
  The sorrowing friends his frantic rage obey.
  Next on his sons his erring fury falls,
  Polites, Paris, Agathon, he calls;
  His threats Deiphobus and Dius hear,
  Hippothous, Pammon, Helenes the seer,
  And generous Antiphon: for yet these nine
  Survived, sad relics of his numerous line.

  "Inglorious sons of an unhappy sire!
  Why did not all in Hector’s cause expire?
  Wretch that I am! my bravest offspring slain.
  You, the disgrace of Priam’s house, remain!
  Mestor the brave, renown’d in ranks of war,
  With Troilus, dreadful on his rushing car,(293)
  And last great Hector, more than man divine,
  For sure he seem’d not of terrestrial line!
  All those relentless Mars untimely slew,
  And left me these, a soft and servile crew,
  Whose days the feast and wanton dance employ,
  Gluttons and flatterers, the contempt of Troy!
  Why teach ye not my rapid wheels to run,
  And speed my journey to redeem my son?"

  The sons their father’s wretched age revere,
  Forgive his anger, and produce the car.
  High on the seat the cabinet they bind:
  The new-made car with solid beauty shined;
  Box was the yoke, emboss’d with costly pains,
  And hung with ringlets to receive the reins;
  Nine cubits long, the traces swept the ground:
  These to the chariot’s polish’d pole they bound.
  Then fix’d a ring the running reins to guide,
  And close beneath the gather’d ends were tied.
  Next with the gifts (the price of Hector slain)
  The sad attendants load the groaning wain:
  Last to the yoke the well-matched mules they bring,
  (The gift of Mysia to the Trojan king.)
  But the fair horses, long his darling care,
  Himself received, and harness’d to his car:
  Grieved as he was, he not this task denied;
  The hoary herald help’d him, at his side.
  While careful these the gentle coursers join’d,
  Sad Hecuba approach’d with anxious mind;
  A golden bowl that foam’d with fragrant wine,
  (Libation destined to the power divine,)
  Held in her right, before the steed she stands,
  And thus consigns it to the monarch’s hands:

  "Take this, and pour to Jove; that safe from harms
  His grace restore thee to our roof and arms.
  Since victor of thy fears, and slighting mine,
  Heaven, or thy soul, inspires this bold design;
  Pray to that god, who high on Ida’s brow
  Surveys thy desolated realms below,
  His winged messenger to send from high,
  And lead thy way with heavenly augury:
  Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
  Tower on the right of yon ethereal space.
  That sign beheld, and strengthen’d from above,
  Boldly pursue the journey mark’d by Jove:
  But if the god his augury denies,
  Suppress thy impulse, nor reject advice."

  "’Tis just (said Priam) to the sire above
  To raise our hands; for who so good as Jove?"
  He spoke, and bade the attendant handmaid bring
  The purest water of the living spring:
  (Her ready hands the ewer and bason held:)
  Then took the golden cup his queen had fill’d;
  On the mid pavement pours the rosy wine,
  Uplifts his eyes, and calls the power divine:

  "O first and greatest! heaven’s imperial lord!
  On lofty Ida’s holy hill adored!
  To stern Achilles now direct my ways,
  And teach him mercy when a father prays.
  If such thy will, despatch from yonder sky
  Thy sacred bird, celestial augury!
  Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
  Tower on the right of yon ethereal space;
  So shall thy suppliant, strengthen’d from above,
  Fearless pursue the journey mark’d by Jove."

  Jove heard his prayer, and from the throne on high,
  Despatch’d his bird, celestial augury!
  The swift-wing’d chaser of the feather’d game,
  And known to gods by Percnos’ lofty name.
  Wide as appears some palace-gate display’d.
  So broad, his pinions stretch’d their ample shade,
  As stooping dexter with resounding wings
  The imperial bird descends in airy rings.
  A dawn of joy in every face appears:
  The mourning matron dries her timorous tears:
  Swift on his car the impatient monarch sprung;
  The brazen portal in his passage rung;
  The mules preceding draw the loaded wain,
  Charged with the gifts: Idaeus holds the rein:
  The king himself his gentle steeds controls,
  And through surrounding friends the chariot rolls.
  On his slow wheels the following people wait,
  Mourn at each step, and give him up to fate;
  With hands uplifted eye him as he pass’d,
  And gaze upon him as they gazed their last.
  Now forward fares the father on his way,
  Through the lone fields, and back to Ilion they.
  Great Jove beheld him as he cross’d the plain,
  And felt the woes of miserable man.
  Then thus to Hermes: "Thou whose constant cares
  Still succour mortals, and attend their prayers;
  Behold an object to thy charge consign’d:
  If ever pity touch’d thee for mankind,
  Go, guard the sire: the observing foe prevent,
  And safe conduct him to Achilles’ tent."

  The god obeys, his golden pinions binds,(294)
  And mounts incumbent on the wings of winds,
  That high, through fields of air, his flight sustain,
  O’er the wide earth, and o’er the boundless main;
  Then grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,
  Or in soft slumbers seals the wakeful eye:
  Thus arm’d, swift Hermes steers his airy way,
  And stoops on Hellespont’s resounding sea.
  A beauteous youth, majestic and divine,
  He seem’d; fair offspring of some princely line!
  Now twilight veil’d the glaring face of day,
  And clad the dusky fields in sober grey;
  What time the herald and the hoary king
  (Their chariots stopping at the silver spring,
  That circling Ilus’ ancient marble flows)
  Allow’d their mules and steeds a short repose,
  Through the dim shade the herald first espies
  A man’s approach, and thus to Priam cries:
  "I mark some foe’s advance: O king! beware;
  This hard adventure claims thy utmost care!
  For much I fear destruction hovers nigh:
  Our state asks counsel; is it best to fly?
  Or old and helpless, at his feet to fall,
  Two wretched suppliants, and for mercy call?"

  The afflicted monarch shiver’d with despair;
  Pale grew his face, and upright stood his hair;
  Sunk was his heart; his colour went and came;
  A sudden trembling shook his aged frame:
  When Hermes, greeting, touch’d his royal hand,
  And, gentle, thus accosts with kind demand:

  "Say whither, father! when each mortal sight
  Is seal’d in sleep, thou wanderest through the night?
  Why roam thy mules and steeds the plains along,
  Through Grecian foes, so numerous and so strong?
  What couldst thou hope, should these thy treasures view;
  These, who with endless hate thy race pursue?
  For what defence, alas! could’st thou provide;
  Thyself not young, a weak old man thy guide?
  Yet suffer not thy soul to sink with dread;
  From me no harm shall touch thy reverend head;
  From Greece I’ll guard thee too; for in those lines
  The living image of my father shines."

  "Thy words, that speak benevolence of mind,
  Are true, my son! (the godlike sire rejoin’d:)
  Great are my hazards; but the gods survey
  My steps, and send thee, guardian of my way.
  Hail, and be bless’d! For scarce of mortal kind
  Appear thy form, thy feature, and thy mind."

  "Nor true are all thy words, nor erring wide;
  (The sacred messenger of heaven replied;)
  But say, convey’st thou through the lonely plains
  What yet most precious of thy store remains,
  To lodge in safety with some friendly hand:
  Prepared, perchance, to leave thy native land?
  Or fliest thou now?—What hopes can Troy retain,
  Thy matchless son, her guard and glory, slain?"

  The king, alarm’d: "Say what, and whence thou art
  Who search the sorrows of a parent’s heart,
  And know so well how godlike Hector died?"
  Thus Priam spoke, and Hermes thus replied:

  "You tempt me, father, and with pity touch:
  On this sad subject you inquire too much.
  Oft have these eyes that godlike Hector view’d
  In glorious fight, with Grecian blood embrued:
  I saw him when, like Jove, his flames he toss’d
  On thousand ships, and wither’d half a host:
  I saw, but help’d not: stern Achilles’ ire
  Forbade assistance, and enjoy’d the fire.
  For him I serve, of Myrmidonian race;
  One ship convey’d us from our native place;
  Polyctor is my sire, an honour’d name,
  Old like thyself, and not unknown to fame;
  Of seven his sons, by whom the lot was cast
  To serve our prince, it fell on me, the last.
  To watch this quarter, my adventure falls:
  For with the morn the Greeks attack your walls;
  Sleepless they sit, impatient to engage,
  And scarce their rulers check their martial rage."

  "If then thou art of stern Pelides’ train,
  (The mournful monarch thus rejoin’d again,)
  Ah tell me truly, where, oh! where are laid
  My son’s dear relics? what befals him dead?
  Have dogs dismember’d (on the naked plains),
  Or yet unmangled rest, his cold remains?"

  "O favour’d of the skies! (thus answered then
  The power that mediates between god and men)
  Nor dogs nor vultures have thy Hector rent,
  But whole he lies, neglected in the tent:
  This the twelfth evening since he rested there,
  Untouch’d by worms, untainted by the air.
  Still as Aurora’s ruddy beam is spread,
  Round his friend’s tomb Achilles drags the dead:
  Yet undisfigured, or in limb or face,
  All fresh he lies, with every living grace,
  Majestical in death! No stains are found
  O’er all the corse, and closed is every wound,
  Though many a wound they gave. Some heavenly care,
  Some hand divine, preserves him ever fair:
  Or all the host of heaven, to whom he led
  A life so grateful, still regard him dead."

  Thus spoke to Priam the celestial guide,
  And joyful thus the royal sire replied:
  "Blest is the man who pays the gods above
  The constant tribute of respect and love!
  Those who inhabit the Olympian bower
  My son forgot not, in exalted power;
  And heaven, that every virtue bears in mind,
  Even to the ashes of the just is kind.
  But thou, O generous youth! this goblet take,
  A pledge of gratitude for Hector’s sake;
  And while the favouring gods our steps survey,
  Safe to Pelides’ tent conduct my way."

  To whom the latent god: "O king, forbear
  To tempt my youth, for apt is youth to err.
  But can I, absent from my prince’s sight,
  Take gifts in secret, that must shun the light?
  What from our master’s interest thus we draw,
  Is but a licensed theft that ’scapes the law.
  Respecting him, my soul abjures the offence;
  And as the crime, I dread the consequence.
  Thee, far as Argos, pleased I could convey;
  Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way:
  On thee attend, thy safety to maintain,
  O’er pathless forests, or the roaring main."

  He said, then took the chariot at a bound,
  And snatch’d the reins, and whirl’d the lash around:
  Before the inspiring god that urged them on,
  The coursers fly with spirit not their own.
  And now they reach’d the naval walls, and found
  The guards repasting, while the bowls go round;
  On these the virtue of his wand he tries,
  And pours deep slumber on their watchful eyes:
  Then heaved the massy gates, removed the bars,
  And o’er the trenches led the rolling cars.
  Unseen, through all the hostile camp they went,
  And now approach’d Pelides’ lofty tent.
  On firs the roof was raised, and cover’d o’er
  With reeds collected from the marshy shore;
  And, fenced with palisades, a hall of state,
  (The work of soldiers,) where the hero sat.
  Large was the door, whose well-compacted strength
  A solid pine-tree barr’d of wondrous length:
  Scarce three strong Greeks could lift its mighty weight,
  But great Achilles singly closed the gate.
  This Hermes (such the power of gods) set wide;
  Then swift alighted the celestial guide,
  And thus reveal’d—"Hear, prince! and understand
  Thou ow’st thy guidance to no mortal hand:
  Hermes I am, descended from above,
  The king of arts, the messenger of Jove,
  Farewell: to shun Achilles’ sight I fly;
  Uncommon are such favours of the sky,
  Nor stand confess’d to frail mortality.
  Now fearless enter, and prefer thy prayers;
  Adjure him by his father’s silver hairs,
  His son, his mother! urge him to bestow
  Whatever pity that stern heart can know."

  Thus having said, he vanish’d from his eyes,
  And in a moment shot into the skies:
  The king, confirm’d from heaven, alighted there,
  And left his aged herald on the car,
  With solemn pace through various rooms he went,
  And found Achilles in his inner tent:
  There sat the hero: Alcimus the brave,
  And great Automedon, attendance gave:
  These served his person at the royal feast;
  Around, at awful distance, stood the rest.

  Unseen by these, the king his entry made:
  And, prostrate now before Achilles laid,
  Sudden (a venerable sight!) appears;
  Embraced his knees, and bathed his hands in tears;
  Those direful hands his kisses press’d, embrued
  Even with the best, the dearest of his blood!

  As when a wretch (who, conscious of his crime,
  Pursued for murder, flies his native clime)
  Just gains some frontier, breathless, pale, amazed,
  All gaze, all wonder: thus Achilles gazed:
  Thus stood the attendants stupid with surprise:
  All mute, yet seem’d to question with their eyes:
  Each look’d on other, none the silence broke,
  Till thus at last the kingly suppliant spoke:

  "Ah think, thou favour’d of the powers divine!(295)
  Think of thy father’s age, and pity mine!
  In me that father’s reverend image trace,
  Those silver hairs, that venerable face;
  His trembling limbs, his helpless person, see!
  In all my equal, but in misery!
  Yet now, perhaps, some turn of human fate
  Expels him helpless from his peaceful state;
  Think, from some powerful foe thou seest him fly,
  And beg protection with a feeble cry.
  Yet still one comfort in his soul may rise;
  He hears his son still lives to glad his eyes,
  And, hearing, still may hope a better day
  May send him thee, to chase that foe away.
  No comfort to my griefs, no hopes remain,
  The best, the bravest, of my sons are slain!
  Yet what a race! ere Greece to Ilion came,
  The pledge of many a loved and loving dame:
  Nineteen one mother bore—Dead, all are dead!
  How oft, alas! has wretched Priam bled!
  Still one was left their loss to recompense;
  His father’s hope, his country’s last defence.
  Him too thy rage has slain! beneath thy steel,
  Unhappy in his country’s cause he fell!

  "For him through hostile camps I bent my way,
  For him thus prostrate at thy feet I lay;
  Large gifts proportion’d to thy wrath I bear;
  O hear the wretched, and the gods revere!

  "Think of thy father, and this face behold!
  See him in me, as helpless and as old!
  Though not so wretched: there he yields to me,
  The first of men in sovereign misery!
  Thus forced to kneel, thus grovelling to embrace
  The scourge and ruin of my realm and race;
  Suppliant my children’s murderer to implore,
  And kiss those hands yet reeking with their gore!"

  These words soft pity in the chief inspire,
  Touch’d with the dear remembrance of his sire.
  Then with his hand (as prostrate still he lay)
  The old man’s cheek he gently turn’d away.
  Now each by turns indulged the gush of woe;
  And now the mingled tides together flow:
  This low on earth, that gently bending o’er;
  A father one, and one a son deplore:
  But great Achilles different passions rend,
  And now his sire he mourns, and now his friend.
  The infectious softness through the heroes ran;
  One universal solemn shower began;
  They bore as heroes, but they felt as man.

  Satiate at length with unavailing woes,
  From the high throne divine Achilles rose;
  The reverend monarch by the hand he raised;
  On his white beard and form majestic gazed,
  Not unrelenting; then serene began
  With words to soothe the miserable man:

  "Alas, what weight of anguish hast thou known,
  Unhappy prince! thus guardless and alone
  Two pass through foes, and thus undaunted face
  The man whose fury has destroy’d thy race!
  Heaven sure has arm’d thee with a heart of steel,
  A strength proportion’d to the woes you feel.
  Rise, then: let reason mitigate your care:
  To mourn avails not: man is born to bear.
  Such is, alas! the gods’ severe decree:
  They, only they are blest, and only free.
  Two urns by Jove’s high throne have ever stood,
  The source of evil one, and one of good;
  From thence the cup of mortal man he fills,
  Blessings to these, to those distributes ill;
  To most he mingles both: the wretch decreed
  To taste the bad unmix’d, is cursed indeed;
  Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven,
  He wanders, outcast both of earth and heaven.
  The happiest taste not happiness sincere;
  But find the cordial draught is dash’d with care.
  Who more than Peleus shone in wealth and power
  What stars concurring bless’d his natal hour!
  A realm, a goddess, to his wishes given;
  Graced by the gods with all the gifts of heaven.
  One evil yet o’ertakes his latest day:
  No race succeeding to imperial sway;
  An only son; and he, alas! ordain’d
  To fall untimely in a foreign land.
  See him, in Troy, the pious care decline
  Of his weak age, to live the curse of thine!
  Thou too, old man, hast happier days beheld;
  In riches once, in children once excell’d;
  Extended Phrygia own’d thy ample reign,
  And all fair Lesbos’ blissful seats contain,
  And all wide Hellespont’s unmeasured main.
  But since the god his hand has pleased to turn,
  And fill thy measure from his bitter urn,
  What sees the sun, but hapless heroes’ falls?
  War, and the blood of men, surround thy walls!
  What must be, must be. Bear thy lot, nor shed
  These unavailing sorrows o’er the dead;
  Thou canst not call him from the Stygian shore,
  But thou, alas! may’st live to suffer more!"

  To whom the king: "O favour’d of the skies!
  Here let me grow to earth! since Hector lies
  On the bare beach deprived of obsequies.
  O give me Hector! to my eyes restore
  His corse, and take the gifts: I ask no more.
  Thou, as thou may’st, these boundless stores enjoy;
  Safe may’st thou sail, and turn thy wrath from Troy;
  So shall thy pity and forbearance give
  A weak old man to see the light and live!"

  "Move me no more, (Achilles thus replies,
  While kindling anger sparkled in his eyes,)
  Nor seek by tears my steady soul to bend:
  To yield thy Hector I myself intend:
  For know, from Jove my goddess-mother came,
  (Old Ocean’s daughter, silver-footed dame,)
  Nor comest thou but by heaven; nor comest alone,
  Some god impels with courage not thy own:
  No human hand the weighty gates unbarr’d,
  Nor could the boldest of our youth have dared
  To pass our outworks, or elude the guard.
  Cease; lest, neglectful of high Jove’s command,
  I show thee, king! thou tread’st on hostile land;
  Release my knees, thy suppliant arts give o’er,
  And shake the purpose of my soul no more."

  The sire obey’d him, trembling and o’eraw’d.
  Achilles, like a lion, rush’d abroad:
  Automedon and Alcimus attend,
  (Whom most he honour’d, since he lost his friend,)
  These to unyoke the mules and horses went,
  And led the hoary herald to the tent;
  Next, heap’d on high, the numerous presents bear,
  (Great Hector’s ransom,) from the polish’d car.
  Two splendid mantles, and a carpet spread,
  They leave: to cover and enwrap the dead.
  Then call the handmaids, with assistant toil
  To wash the body and anoint with oil,
  Apart from Priam: lest the unhappy sire,
  Provoked to passion, once more rouse to ire
  The stern Pelides; and nor sacred age,
  Nor Jove’s command, should check the rising rage.
  This done, the garments o’er the corse they spread;
  Achilles lifts it to the funeral bed:
  Then, while the body on the car they laid,
  He groans, and calls on loved Patroclus’ shade:

  "If, in that gloom which never light must know,
  The deeds of mortals touch the ghosts below,
  O friend! forgive me, that I thus fulfil
  (Restoring Hector) heaven’s unquestion’d will.
  The gifts the father gave, be ever thine,
  To grace thy manes, and adorn thy shrine."(296)

  He said, and, entering, took his seat of state;
  Where full before him reverend Priam sate;
  To whom, composed, the godlike chief begun:
  "Lo! to thy prayer restored, thy breathless son;
  Extended on the funeral couch he lies;
  And soon as morning paints the eastern skies,
  The sight is granted to thy longing eyes:
  But now the peaceful hours of sacred night
  Demand reflection, and to rest invite:
  Nor thou, O father! thus consumed with woe,
  The common cares that nourish life forego.
  Not thus did Niobe, of form divine,
  A parent once, whose sorrows equall’d thine:
  Six youthful sons, as many blooming maids,
  In one sad day beheld the Stygian shades;
  Those by Apollo’s silver bow were slain,
  These, Cynthia’s arrows stretch’d upon the plain:
  So was her pride chastised by wrath divine,
  Who match’d her own with bright Latona’s line;
  But two the goddess, twelve the queen enjoy’d;
  Those boasted twelve, the avenging two destroy’d.
  Steep’d in their blood, and in the dust outspread,
  Nine days, neglected, lay exposed the dead;
  None by to weep them, to inhume them none;
  (For Jove had turn’d the nation all to stone.)
  The gods themselves, at length relenting gave
  The unhappy race the honours of a grave.
  Herself a rock (for such was heaven’s high will)
  Through deserts wild now pours a weeping rill;
  Where round the bed whence Achelous springs,
  The watery fairies dance in mazy rings;
  There high on Sipylus’s shaggy brow,
  She stands, her own sad monument of woe;
  The rock for ever lasts, the tears for ever flow.

  "Such griefs, O king! have other parents known;
  Remember theirs, and mitigate thy own.
  The care of heaven thy Hector has appear’d,
  Nor shall he lie unwept, and uninterr’d;
  Soon may thy aged cheeks in tears be drown’d,
  And all the eyes of Ilion stream around."

  He said, and, rising, chose the victim ewe
  With silver fleece, which his attendants slew.
  The limbs they sever from the reeking hide,
  With skill prepare them, and in parts divide:
  Each on the coals the separate morsels lays,
  And, hasty, snatches from the rising blaze.
  With bread the glittering canisters they load,
  Which round the board Automedon bestow’d.
  The chief himself to each his portion placed,
  And each indulging shared in sweet repast.
  When now the rage of hunger was repress’d,
  The wondering hero eyes his royal guest:
  No less the royal guest the hero eyes,
  His godlike aspect and majestic size;
  Here, youthful grace and noble fire engage;
  And there, the mild benevolence of age.
  Thus gazing long, the silence neither broke,
  (A solemn scene!) at length the father spoke:

  "Permit me now, beloved of Jove! to steep
  My careful temples in the dew of sleep:
  For, since the day that number’d with the dead
  My hapless son, the dust has been my bed;
  Soft sleep a stranger to my weeping eyes;
  My only food, my sorrows and my sighs!
  Till now, encouraged by the grace you give,
  I share thy banquet, and consent to live."

  With that, Achilles bade prepare the bed,
  With purple soft and shaggy carpets spread;
  Forth, by the flaming lights, they bend their way,
  And place the couches, and the coverings lay.
  Then he: "Now, father, sleep, but sleep not here;
  Consult thy safety, and forgive my fear,
  Lest any Argive, at this hour awake,
  To ask our counsel, or our orders take,
  Approaching sudden to our open’d tent,
  Perchance behold thee, and our grace prevent.
  Should such report thy honour’d person here,
  The king of men the ransom might defer;
  But say with speed, if aught of thy desire
  Remains unask’d; what time the rites require
  To inter thy Hector? For, so long we stay
  Our slaughtering arm, and bid the hosts obey."

  "If then thy will permit (the monarch said)
  To finish all due honours to the dead,
  This of thy grace accord: to thee are known
  The fears of Ilion, closed within her town;
  And at what distance from our walls aspire
  The hills of Ide, and forests for the fire.
  Nine days to vent our sorrows I request,
  The tenth shall see the funeral and the feast;
  The next, to raise his monument be given;
  The twelfth we war, if war be doom’d by heaven!"

  "This thy request (replied the chief) enjoy:
  Till then our arms suspend the fall of Troy."

  Then gave his hand at parting, to prevent
  The old man’s fears, and turn’d within the tent;
  Where fair Briseis, bright in blooming charms,
  Expects her hero with desiring arms.
  But in the porch the king and herald rest;
  Sad dreams of care yet wandering in their breast.
  Now gods and men the gifts of sleep partake;
  Industrious Hermes only was awake,
  The king’s return revolving in his mind,
  To pass the ramparts, and the watch to blind.
  The power descending hover’d o’er his head:
  "And sleep’st thou, father! (thus the vision said:)
  Now dost thou sleep, when Hector is restored?
  Nor fear the Grecian foes, or Grecian lord?
  Thy presence here should stern Atrides see,
  Thy still surviving sons may sue for thee;
  May offer all thy treasures yet contain,
  To spare thy age; and offer all in vain."

  Waked with the word the trembling sire arose,
  And raised his friend: the god before him goes:
  He joins the mules, directs them with his hand,
  And moves in silence through the hostile land.
  When now to Xanthus’ yellow stream they drove,
  (Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove,)
  The winged deity forsook their view,
  And in a moment to Olympus flew.
  Now shed Aurora round her saffron ray,
  Sprang through the gates of light, and gave the day:
  Charged with the mournful load, to Ilion go
  The sage and king, majestically slow.
  Cassandra first beholds, from Ilion’s spire,
  The sad procession of her hoary sire;
  Then, as the pensive pomp advanced more near,
  (Her breathless brother stretched upon the bier,)
  A shower of tears o’erflows her beauteous eyes,
  Alarming thus all Ilion with her cries:

  "Turn here your steps, and here your eyes employ,
  Ye wretched daughters, and ye sons of Troy!
  If e’er ye rush’d in crowds, with vast delight,
  To hail your hero glorious from the fight,
  Now meet him dead, and let your sorrows flow;
  Your common triumph, and your common woe."

  In thronging crowds they issue to the plains;
  Nor man nor woman in the walls remains;
  In every face the self-same grief is shown;
  And Troy sends forth one universal groan.
  At Scaea’s gates they meet the mourning wain,
  Hang on the wheels, and grovel round the slain.
  The wife and mother, frantic with despair,
  Kiss his pale cheek, and rend their scatter’d hair:
  Thus wildly wailing, at the gates they lay;
  And there had sigh’d and sorrow’d out the day;
  But godlike Priam from the chariot rose:
  "Forbear (he cried) this violence of woes;
  First to the palace let the car proceed,
  Then pour your boundless sorrows o’er the dead."

  The waves of people at his word divide,
  Slow rolls the chariot through the following tide;
  Even to the palace the sad pomp they wait:
  They weep, and place him on the bed of state.
  A melancholy choir attend around,
  With plaintive sighs, and music’s solemn sound:
  Alternately they sing, alternate flow
  The obedient tears, melodious in their woe.
  While deeper sorrows groan from each full heart,
  And nature speaks at every pause of art.

  First to the corse the weeping consort flew;
  Around his neck her milk-white arms she threw,
  "And oh, my Hector! Oh, my lord! (she cries)
  Snatch’d in thy bloom from these desiring eyes!
  Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
  And I abandon’d, desolate, alone!
  An only son, once comfort of our pains,
  Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
  Never to manly age that son shall rise,
  Or with increasing graces glad my eyes:
  For Ilion now (her great defender slain)
  Shall sink a smoking ruin on the plain.
  Who now protects her wives with guardian care?
  Who saves her infants from the rage of war?
  Now hostile fleets must waft those infants o’er
  (Those wives must wait them) to a foreign shore:
  Thou too, my son, to barbarous climes shall go,
  The sad companion of thy mother’s woe;
  Driven hence a slave before the victor’s sword
  Condemn’d to toil for some inhuman lord:
  Or else some Greek whose father press’d the plain,
  Or son, or brother, by great Hector slain,
  In Hector’s blood his vengeance shall enjoy,
  And hurl thee headlong from the towers of Troy.(297)
  For thy stern father never spared a foe:
  Thence all these tears, and all this scene of woe!
  Thence many evils his sad parents bore,
  His parents many, but his consort more.
  Why gav’st thou not to me thy dying hand?
  And why received not I thy last command?
  Some word thou would’st have spoke, which, sadly dear,
  My soul might keep, or utter with a tear;
  Which never, never could be lost in air,
  Fix’d in my heart, and oft repeated there!"

  Thus to her weeping maids she makes her moan,
  Her weeping handmaids echo groan for groan.

  The mournful mother next sustains her part:
  "O thou, the best, the dearest to my heart!
  Of all my race thou most by heaven approved,
  And by the immortals even in death beloved!
  While all my other sons in barbarous bands
  Achilles bound, and sold to foreign lands,
  This felt no chains, but went a glorious ghost,
  Free, and a hero, to the Stygian coast.
  Sentenced, ’tis true, by his inhuman doom,
  Thy noble corse was dragg’d around the tomb;
  (The tomb of him thy warlike arm had slain;)
  Ungenerous insult, impotent and vain!
  Yet glow’st thou fresh with every living grace;
  No mark of pain, or violence of face:
  Rosy and fair! as Phoebus’ silver bow
  Dismiss’d thee gently to the shades below."

  Thus spoke the dame, and melted into tears.
  Sad Helen next in pomp of grief appears;
  Fast from the shining sluices of her eyes
  Fall the round crystal drops, while thus she cries.

  "Ah, dearest friend! in whom the gods had join’d(298)
  Tne mildest manners with the bravest mind,
  Now twice ten years (unhappy years) are o’er
  Since Paris brought me to the Trojan shore,
  (O had I perish’d, ere that form divine
  Seduced this soft, this easy heart of mine!)
  Yet was it ne’er my fate, from thee to find
  A deed ungentle, or a word unkind.
  When others cursed the authoress of their woe,
  Thy pity check’d my sorrows in their flow.
  If some proud brother eyed me with disdain,
  Or scornful sister with her sweeping train,
  Thy gentle accents soften’d all my pain.
  For thee I mourn, and mourn myself in thee,
  The wretched source of all this misery.
  The fate I caused, for ever I bemoan;
  Sad Helen has no friend, now thou art gone!
  Through Troy’s wide streets abandon’d shall I roam!
  In Troy deserted, as abhorr’d at home!"

  So spoke the fair, with sorrow-streaming eye.
  Distressful beauty melts each stander-by.
  On all around the infectious sorrow grows;
  But Priam check’d the torrent as it rose:
  "Perform, ye Trojans! what the rites require,
  And fell the forests for a funeral pyre;
  Twelve days, nor foes nor secret ambush dread;
  Achilles grants these honours to the dead."(299)