CHAPTER I.


It was a sultry summer night of the year five hundred and twenty-six,
A.D.

Thick clouds lay low over the dark surface of the Adrea, whose shores
and waters were melted together in undistinguishable gloom; only now
and then a flash of distant lightning lit up the silent city of
Ravenna. At unequal intervals the wind swept through the ilexes and
pines on the range of hills which rise at some distance to the west of
the town, and which were once crowned by a temple of Neptune. At that
time already half ruined, it has now almost completely disappeared,
leaving only the most scanty traces.

It was quiet on the bosky heights; only sometimes a piece of rock,
loosened by storms, clattered down the stony declivity, and at last
splashed into the marshy waters of the canals and ditches which belted
the entire circle of the sea-fortress; or a weather-beaten slab slipped
from the tabled roof of the old temple and fell breaking on to the
marble steps--forebodings of the threatened fall of the whole building.

But these dismal sounds seemed to be unnoticed by a man who sat
immovable on the second step of the flight which led into the temple,
leaning his back against the topmost step and looking silently and
fixedly across the declivity in the direction of the city below.

He sat thus motionless, but waiting eagerly, for a long time. He heeded
not that the wind drove the heavy drops which began to fell into his
face, and rudely worried the full long beard that flowed down to his
iron belt, almost entirely covering his broad breast with shining white
hair.

At last he rose and descended several of the marble steps: "They come,"
said he.

The light of a torch which rapidly advanced from the city towards the
temple became visible; then quick and heavy footsteps were heard, and
shortly after three men ascended the flight of steps.

"Hail, Master Hildebrand, son of Hilding!" cried the advancing
torch-bearer, as soon as he reached the row of columns of the Pronaos
or antehall, in which time had made some gaps. He spoke in the Gothic
tongue, and had a peculiarly melodious voice. He carried his torch in a
sort of lantern--beautiful Corinthian bronze-work on the handle,
transparent ivory forming the four-sided screen and the arched and
ornamentally-perforated lid--and lifting it high, put it into the iron
ring that held together the shattered centre column.

The white light fell upon a face beautiful as that of Apollo, with
laughing light-blue eyes; his fair hair was parted in the middle of his
forehead into two long and flowing tresses, which fell right and left
upon his shoulders. His mouth and nose, finely, almost softly
chiselled, were of perfect form; the first down of a bright golden
beard covered his pleasant lip and gently-dimpled chin. He wore only
white garments--a war-mantle of fine wool, held up on the right
shoulder by a clasp in the form of a griffin, and a Roman tunic of soft
silk, both embroidered with a stripe of gold. White leather straps
fastened the sandals to his feet, and reached, laced cross-wise, to his
knees. Two broad gold rings encircled his naked and shining white arms.
And as he stood reposing after his exertion, his right hand clasping a
tall lance which served him both for staff and weapon, his left resting
on his hip, looking down upon his slower companions, it seemed as if
there had again entered the grey old temple some youthful godlike form
of its happiest days.

The second of the new-comers had, in spite of a general family
likeness, an expression totally different from that of the
torch-bearer.

He was some years older, his form was stouter and broader. Low down
upon his bull-neck grew his short, thick, and curly brown hair. He was
of almost gigantic height and strength. There were wanting in his face
the sunny shimmer, the trusting joy and hope which illumined the
features of his younger brother. Instead of these, there was in his
whole appearance an expression of bear-like strength and bear-like
courage; he wore a shaggy wolf-skin, the jaws of which shaded his head
like a cowl, a simple woollen doublet beneath, and on his right
shoulder he carried a short and heavy club made of the hard root of an
oak.

The third comer followed the others with a cautious step; a middle-aged
man with a dignified and prudent expression of countenance. He wore the
steel helmet, the sword, and the brown war-mantle of the Gothic
footmen. His straight light-brown hair was cut square across the
forehead--an ancient Germanic mode of wearing the hair, which one often
sees represented on Roman triumphal columns, and which has been
preserved by the German peasant to this day. The regular features of
his open face, his grey and steady eyes, were full of reflective
manliness and sober repose.

When he, too, had reached the cella of the temple, and had greeted the
old man, the torch-bearer cried in an eager voice:

"Well, old Master Hildebrand, a fine adventure must it be to which thou
hast bidden us on such an inhospitable night, and in this wilderness of
art and nature! Speak--what is it?"

Instead of replying, the old man turned to the last comer and asked:
"Where is the fourth whom I invited?"

"He wished to go alone. He shunned us all. Thou knowest his manner
well."

"There he comes!" cried the beautiful youth, pointing to another side
of the hill. And, in fact, a man of very peculiar appearance now drew
near.

The full glare of the torch illumined a ghastly-pale face that seemed
almost bloodless. Long and shining black locks, like dark snakes, hung
dishevelled from his uncovered head. Arched black brows and long lashes
shaded large and melancholy dark eyes, full of repressed fire. A
sharply-cut eagle nose bent towards the fine and smoothly-shaven mouth,
around which resigned grief had traced deep lines.

His form and bearing were still young; but pain seemed to have
prematurely ripened his soul.

He wore a coat of mail and greaves of black steel, and in his right
hand gleamed a battle-axe with a long lance-like shaft. He merely
greeted the others with a nod of the head, and placing himself behind
the old man, who now bade them all four step close to the pillar on
which the torch was fixed, began in a suppressed voice:

"I appointed you to meet me here to listen to earnest words, which must
be spoken, unheard, to faithful men. I have sought for months in all
the nation, and have chosen you. You are the right men. When you have
heard me, you will yourselves feel that you must be silent about this
night's meeting."

The third comer, he with the steel helmet, looked at the old man with
earnest eyes.

"Speak," said he quietly, "we hear and are silent. Of what wilt thou
speak to us?"

"Of our people; of this kingdom of the Goths, which stands close to an
abyss!"

"An abyss!" eagerly cried the fair youth. His gigantic brother smiled
and lifted his head attentively.

"Yes, an abyss," repeated the old man; "and you alone can hold and save
it."

"May Heaven pardon thee thy words!" interrupted the fair youth with
vivacity. "Have we not our King Theodoric, whom even his enemies call
the Great; the most magnificent hero, the wisest prince in the world?
Have we not this smiling land Italia, with all its treasures? What upon
earth can compare with the kingdom of the Goths?"

The old man, without heeding his questions, continued:

"Listen to me. The greatness and worth of King Theodoric, my beloved
master and my dear son, are best known by Hildebrand, son of Hilding.
More than fifty years ago I carried him in these arms, a struggling
boy, to his father, and said: 'There is an offspring of a strong
race--he will be a joy to thee.' And when he grew up I cut for him his
first arrow, and washed his first wound. I accompanied him to the
golden city of Byzantium, and guarded him body and soul. When he fought
for this lovely land, I went before him, foot by foot, and held the
shield over him in thirty battles. He may possibly, since then, have
found more learned advisers and friends than his old master-at-arms,
but hardly wiser, and surely not more faithful. Long ere the sun shone
upon thee, my young falcon, I had experienced a thousand times how
strong was his arm, how sharp his eye, how clear his head, how terrible
he could be in battle, how friendly over the cup, and how superior he
was even to the Greekling in shrewdness. But the old Eagle's wings have
become heavy. His battle-years weigh upon him; for he and you, and all
your race, cannot bear years like I and my play-fellows; he lies sick
in soul and body, mysteriously sick, in his golden hall down there in
the Raven-town. The physicians say that though his arm be yet strong,
any beat of his heart may kill him with lightning-like rapidity, and
with any setting sun he may journey down to the dead. And who is his
heir? who will then uphold this kingdom? Amalaswintha, his daughter;
and Athalaric, his grandson; a woman and a child!"

"The Princess is wise," said he with the helmet and the sword.

"Yes, she writes Greek to the Emperor, and speaks Latin with the pious
Cassiodorus. I doubt that she even thinks in Gothic. Woe to us, if she
should hold the rudder in a storm!"

"But I see no signs of storm, old man," laughed the torch-bearer, and
shook his locks. "From whence will it blow? The Emperor is again
reconciled, the Bishop of Rome is installed by the King himself, the
Frank princes are his nephews, the Italians are better off under our
shield than ever before. I see no danger anywhere."

"The Emperor Justinus is only a weak old man," said he of the sword,
assentingly. "I know him."

"But his nephew, who will soon be his successor, and is already his
right arm--knowest thou him? Unfathomable as the night and false as the
sea is Justinian! I know him well, and fear that which he meditates. I
accompanied the last embassy to Byzantium. He came to our camp; he
thought me drunk--the fool! he little knows what Hilding's child can
drink!--and he questioned me about everything which must be known in
order to undo us. Well, he got the right answer from me! But I know as
well as I know my name, that this man will again get possession of
Italy; and he will not leave in it even the footprint of a Goth!"

"If he can," grumblingly put in the brother of the fair youth.

"Right, friend Hildebad, if he can. And he can do much. Byzantium can
do much."

The other shrugged his shoulder

"Knowest thou _how_ much?" asked the old man angrily. "For twelve long
years our great King struggled with Byzantium and did not prevail. But
at that time thou wast not yet born," he added more quietly.

"Well," interposed the fair youth, coming to his brother's help, "but
at that time the Goths stood alone in the strange land. Now we have won
a second half. We have a home--Italy. We have brothers-at-arms--the
Italians!"

"Italy our home!" cried the old man bitterly; "yes, that is the
mistake. And the Italians our allies against Byzantium? Thou young
fool!"

"They were our King's own words," answered the rebuffed youth.

"Yes, yes; I know these mad speeches well, that will destroy us all. We
are as strange here to-day as forty years ago, when we descended from
the mountains; and we shall still be strangers in the land after
another thousand years. Here we shall be for ever 'the barbarians.'"

"That is true; but why do we remain barbarians? Whose fault is it but
ours? Why do we not learn from the Italians?"

"Be silent," cried the old man, trembling with wrath, "be silent,
Totila, with such thoughts; they have become the curse of my house!"
Painfully recovering himself, he continued: "The Italians are our
deadly enemies, not our brothers. Woe to us if we trust them! Oh that
the King had followed my counsel after his victory, and slain all who
could carry sword and shield, from the stammering boy to the stammering
old man! They will hate us eternally. And they are right. But we, we
are the fools to trust them."

There ensued a pause; the youth had become very grave, and asked:

"So thou holdest friendship to be impossible 'twixt them and us?"

"No peace between the sons of Gaul and the Southern folk! A man enters
the gold cave of a dragon--he holds the head of the dragon down with an
iron fist; the monster begs for life. The man feels compassion because
of his glittering scales, and feasts his eyes on the treasures of the
cavern. What will the poisonous reptile do? As soon as he can he will
sting him stealthily, so that he who spared him dies."

"Well then, let them come, the despicable Greeks!" shouted the gigantic
Hildebad; "let the race of vipers dart their forked tongues at us. We
will beat them down--so!" And he lifted his club and let it fall
heavily, so that the marble slab split into pieces, and the old temple
resounded with the blow.

"Yes, they shall try!" cried Totila, and from his eyes shone a martial
fire that made him look still more beautiful; "if these unthankful
Romans betray us, if the false Byzantines come," he looked with loving
pride at his strong brother, "see, old man, we have men like oaks!"

The old master-at-arms nodded, well pleased:

"Yes, Hildebad is very strong, though not quite as strong as Winither,
Walamer and others, who were young with me. Against North-men strength
is a good thing. But this Southern folk," he continued angrily, "fight
from towers and battlements. They carry on war as they might make a
reckoning, and at last they reckon a host of heroes into a corner,
where they can neither budge nor stir. I know one such arithmetician in
Byzantium, who is himself no man, but conquers men. Thou, too, knowest
him, Witichis?" So asking, he turned to the man with the sword.

"I know Narses," answered Witichis reflectively. He had become very
grave. "What thou hast said, son of Hilding, is, alas! too true. Such
thoughts have often crossed my mind, but confusedly, darkly, more a
horror than a thought. Thy words are undeniable; the King is at the
point of death--the Princess has Grecian sympathies--Justinian is on
the watch--the Italians are false as serpents--the generals of
Byzantium are magicians in art, but"--here he took a deep breath--"we
Goths do not stand alone. Our wise King has made friends and allies in
abundance. The King of the Vandals is his brother-in-law, the King of
the West Goths his grandson, the Kings of the Burgundians, the
Herulians, the Thuringians, the Franks, are related to him; all people
honour him as their father; the Sarmatians, even the distant Esthonians
on the Baltic, send him skins and yellow amber in homage. Is all
that----"

"All that is nothing! It is flattering words and coloured rags! Will
the Esthonians help us against Belisarius and Narses with their amber?
Woe to us, if we cannot win alone! These grandsons and sons-in-law
flatter as long as they tremble, and when they no more tremble, they
will threaten. I know the faith of kings! We have enemies around us,
open and secret, and no friends beyond ourselves."

A silence ensued, during which all gravely considered the old man's
words; the storm rushed howling round the weather-beaten columns and
shook the crumbling temple.

Then, looking up from the ground, Witichis was the first to speak:

"The danger is great," said he, firmly and collectedly, "we will hope
not unavoidable. Certainly thou hast not bidden us hither to look
deedless at despair. There must be a remedy, so speak; how, thinkest
thou, can we help?"

The old man advanced a step towards him and took his hand:

"That's brave, Witichis, son of Waltari. I knew thee well, and will not
forget that thou wert the first to speak a word of bold assurance. Yes,
I too think we are not yet past help, and I have asked you all to come
here, where no Italian hears us, in order to decide upon what is best
to be done. First tell me your opinion, then I will speak."

As all remained silent, he turned to the man with the black locks:

"If thy thoughts are ours, speak, Teja! Why art thou ever silent?"

"I am silent because I differ from you."

The others were amazed. Hildebrand spoke:

"What dost thou mean, my son?"

"Hildebad and Totila do not see any danger; thou and Witichis see it
and hope; but I saw it long ago, and have no hope."

"Thou seest too darkly; who dare despair before the battle?" said
Witichis.

"Shall we perish with our swords in the sheath, without a struggle and
without fame?" cried Totila.

"Not without a struggle, my Totila, and not without fame, I am sure,"
answered Teja, slightly swinging his battle-axe. "We will fight so that
it shall never be forgotten in all future ages; fight with highest
fame, but without victory. The star of the Goths is setting."

"Meseems, on the contrary, that it will rise very high," cried Totila
impatiently. "Let us go to the King; speak to him, Hildebrand, as thou
hast spoken to us. He is wise; he will devise means."

The old man shook his head:

"I have spoken to him twenty times. He listens no more. He is tired and
will die, and his soul is darkened, I know not by what shadows. What is
thy advice, Hildebad?"

"I think," answered Hildebad, proudly raising his head, "that as soon
as the old lion has closed his tired eyes, we arm two hosts. Witichis
and Teja lead the one before Byzantium and burn it down; with the other
I and my brother climb the Alps and destroy Paris, that dragon's nest
of the Merovingians, and make it a heap of stones for ever. Then there
will be peace in East and West."

"We have no ships against Byzantium," said Witichis.

"And the Franks are seven to one against us," said Hildebrand. "But thy
intentions are valiant, Hildebad. Say, what advisest thou, Witichis?"

"I advise a league--weighted with oaths, secured with hostages--of all
the Northern races against the Greeks."

"Thou believest in fidelity, because thou thyself art true. My friend,
only the Goths can help the Goths. But they must be reminded that they
_are_ Goths. Listen to me. You are all young, love all manner of
things, and have many pleasures. One loves a woman, another weapons, a
third has some hope or some grief which is to him as a beloved one. But
believe me, a time will come--it may be during your young days--when
all these joys and even pains will become worthless as faded wreaths
from yesterday's banquet.

"Then many will become soft and pious, forget that which is on earth,
and strive for that which is beyond the grave. But that neither you nor
I can do. I love the earth, with mountain and wood and meadow and
rushing stream; and I love life, with all its hate and long love, its
tenacious anger and dumb pride. Of the ethereal life in the wind-clouds
which is taught by the Christian priests, I know, and will know,
nothing. But there is one possession--when all else is gone--which a
true man never loses. Look at me. I am a leafless trunk. I have lost
all that rejoiced my life; my wife is dead long since; my sons, my
grandchildren are dead: except one, who is worse than dead--who has
become an Italian.

"All, all are gone, and now my first love and last pride, my great
King, descends tired into his grave. What keeps me still alive? What
gives me still courage and will? What drives _me_, an old man, up to
this mountain in this night of storm like a youth? What glows beneath
my icy beard with pure love, with stubborn pride, and with defiant
sorrow? What but the impulse that lies indestructible in our blood,
the deep impulsion and attraction to my people, the glowing and
all-powerful love of the race that is called Goth; that speaks the
noble, sweet, and homely tongue of my parents! This love of race
remains like a sacrificial fire in the heart, when all other flames are
extinguished; this is the highest sentiment of the human heart; the
strongest power in the human soul, true to the death and invincible!"

The old man had spoken with enthusiasm--his hair floated on the
wind--he stood like an old priest of the Huns amongst the young men,
who clenched their hands upon their weapons.

At last Teja spoke: "Thou art in the right; these flames still glow
when all else is spent. They burn in thee--in us--perhaps in a hundred
other hearts amongst our brothers; but can this save a whole people?
No! And can these fires seize the mass, the thousands, the hundred
thousands?"

"They can, my son, they can! Thanks to the gods, that they can!--Hear
me. It is now five-and-forty years ago that we Goths, many hundred
thousands, were shut up with our wives and children in the ravines of
the Hæmus. We were in the greatest need.

"The King's brother had been beaten and killed in a treacherous attack
by the Greeks, and all the provisions that he was to bring to us were
lost. We lay in the rocky ravines and suffered such hunger, that we
cooked grass and leather. Behind us rose the inaccessible precipices;
before, and to the left of us, the sea; to the right, in a narrow pass,
lay the enemy, threefold our number. Many thousands of us were
destroyed by famine or the hardships of the winter; twenty times had we
vainly tried to break through the pass.

"We almost despaired. Then there came a messenger from the Emperor to
the King, and offered us life, freedom, wine, bread, meat--under one
condition: that, separated from each other, four by four, we should be
scattered over the whole Roman Empire; none of us should ever again woo
a Gothic woman; none should ever again teach his child our tongue or
customs; the name and being of Goth should cease to exist, we should
become Romans.

"The King sprang up, called us together, and reported this condition
to us in a flaming speech, and asked at the end, whether we would
rather give up the language, customs and life of our people, or die
with him? His words spread like wildfire, the people shouted like a
hundred-voiced tumultuous sea; they brandished their weapons, rushed
into the pass; the Greeks were swept away as if they had never stood
there, and we were victors and free!"

His eyes glittered with pride; after a pause he continued:

"It is this alone which can save us now as then; if once the Goths feel
that they fight for their nationality, and to protect the secret jewel
that lies in the customs and speech of a people, like a miraculous
well-spring, then they may laugh at the hate of the Greeks and the
wiles of the Italians. And, first of all, I ask you solemnly: Do you
feel as strongly convinced as I do, that this love of our people is our
highest aim, our dearest treasure, our strongest shield? Can you say
with me: My people is to me the highest, all else is nothing; to my
people I will sacrifice all that I have and am. Will you say this, and
can you do it?"

"We will; we can!" cried the four men.

"'Tis well," continued the old man. "But Teja is right, all Goths do
not feel this as we do, and yet, if it is to be of any use, all _must_
feel it. Therefore swear to me, to fill with the spirit of this hour
all those with whom you live and act, from now henceforward. Too many
of our folk have been dazzled by the foreign splendour; many have
donned Grecian clothing and Roman thoughts; they are ashamed to be
called barbarians; they wish to forget, and to make it forgotten, that
they are Goths--woe to the fools! They have torn their hearts out of
their bosoms, and yet wish to live; they are like leaves that have
proudly loosened themselves from the parent stem. The wind will come
and blow them into the mire and dirt to decay; but the stem will still
stand in the midst of the storm, and will keep alive whatever clings to
it faithfully. Therefore awaken and warn the people. Tell the boys the
legends of their forefathers, relate the battles of the Huns, the
victories over the Romans; show the men the threatening danger, and
that nationality alone is our shield; warn your sisters that they may
embrace no Roman and no would-be Roman; teach your wives and your
brides that they must sacrifice everything, even themselves and you, to
the fortune of the good Goths, so that when the enemy come, they may
find a strong, proud, united people, against which they shall break
themselves like waves upon a rock. Will you aid me in this?"

"Yes," they cried, "we will!"

"I believe you," continued the old man; "I believe you on your mere
word. Not to bind you faster--for what can bind the false?--but because
I cling to old custom, and because _that_ succeeds best which is done
after the manner of our forefathers--follow me."



                              CHAPTER II.

Hildebrand took the torch from the column, and went across the inner
space, past the cella of the temple, past the ruined high altar, past
the bases of the statues of the gods--long since fallen--to the
porticum or back of the edifice. Silently his companions followed the
old man, who led them down the steps into the open field.

After a short walk they stopped under an ancient holm, whose mighty
boughs held off storm and rain like a roof.

A strange sight presented itself under this oak, which, however, at
once reminded the old man's Gothic companions of a custom of ancient
heathen times in their distant Northern home.

Under the oak a strip of thick turf, only a foot broad, but several
yards long, had been cut loose from the ground; the two ends of the
strip still lay in the shallow ditch thus formed, but in the middle it
was raised over and supported by three long spears of unequal length,
which were fixed into the ground, the tallest spear being in the
middle, so that the whole arrangement formed a triangle, under which
several men could stand commodiously between the shafts of the spears.

In the ditch stood a brazen cauldron filled with water, near it lay a
pointed and sharp butcher's knife, of extremely ancient form; the haft
was made of the horn of the ure-ox, the blade of flint.

The old man came forward, stuck the torch into the earth close to the
cauldron, and then stepped, right foot foremost, into the ditch; he
turned to the east and bent his head, then he beckoned to his friends
to join him, putting his finger to his lip in sign of silence. Without
a sound the four men stepped into the ditch beside him, Witichis and
Teja to his right, the two brothers to his left, and all five joined
hands in a solemn chain.

Then the old man loosened his hands from those of Witichis and
Hildebad, who stood next to him, and knelt down. First he took up a
handful of the black mould and threw it over his left shoulder; then he
dipped his other hand into the cauldron and sprinkled the water to the
right behind him. After this he blew into the windy night-air that
rustled in his long beard; and, lastly, he swung the torch from right
to left over his head. Then he again stuck it into the earth and spoke
in murmuring tones:

"Hear me, ancient earth, welling water, ethereal air, flickering flame!
Listen to me well and preserve my words. Here stand five men of the
race of Graut, Teja and Totila, Hildebad and Hildebrand, and Witichis,
Waltari's son.

     "We stand here in a quiet hour
      To bind a bond between blood-brethren,
      For ever and ever and every day.
      In closest communion as kindred companions.
      In friendship and feud, in revenge and right.
      One hope, one hate, one love, one lament,
      As we drop to one drop
      Our blood as blood-brethren."

At these words he bared his left arm, the others did the same; close
together they stretched their five arms over the cauldron, the old man
lifted the sharp flint-knife, and with one stroke scratched the skin of
his own and the others' forearms, so that the blood of all flowed in
red drops into the brazen cauldron. Then they retook their former
positions, and the old man continued murmuring:

     "And we swear the solemn oath,
      To sacrifice all that is ours,
      House, horse, and armour,
      Court, kindred, and cattle,
      Wife, weapons, and wares,
      Son, and servants, and body, and life,
      To the glance and glory of the race of Gaut,
      To the good Goths.
      And who of us would withdraw
      From honouring the oath with all sacrifices--"

here he, and at a sign, the others also, stepped out of the ditch from
under the strip of turf--

     "His red blood shall run unrevenged
      Like this water under the wood-sod--"

he lifted the cauldron, poured its bloody contents into the ditch, and
then took it out, together with the other implements--

     "Upon his head shall the halls of Heaven
      Crash cumbrous down and crush him,
      Solid as this sod."

At one stroke he struck down the three supporting lance-shafts, and
dully fell the heavy turf-roof back into the ditch. The five men now
placed themselves again on the spot thus covered by the turf, with
their hands entwined, and the old man said in more rapid tones:

"Whosoever does not keep this oath; whosoever does not protect his
blood-brother like his own brother during his life, and revenge his
death; whosoever refuses to sacrifice everything that he possesses to
the people of the Goths, when called upon to do so by a brother in case
of necessity, shall be for ever subject to the eternal and infernal
powers which reign under the green grass of the earth; good men shall
tread with their feet over the perjurer's head, and his name shall be
without honour wherever Christian folk ring bells and heathen folk
offer sacrifices, wherever mothers caress their children and the wind
blows over the wide world. Say, companions, shall it be thus with the
vile perjurer?"

"Thus shall it be with him," repeated the four men.

After a grave pause, Hildebrand loosened the chain of their hands, and
said:

"That you may know why I bade you come hither, and how sacred this
place is to me, come and see."

With this he lifted the torch and went before them behind the mighty
trunk of the oak, in front of which they had taken the oath. Silently
his friends followed, and saw with astonishment, that, exactly in a
line with the turfy ditch in which they had stood, there yawned a wide
and open grave, from which the slab of stone had been rolled away. At
the bottom, shining ghastly in the light of the torch, lay three long
white skeletons; a few rusty pieces of armour, lance-points, and
shield-bosses lay beside them.

The men looked with surprise; now into the grave, now at Hildebrand. He
silently held the torch over the chasm for some minutes. At last he
said quietly:

"My three sons. They have lain here for more than thirty years. They
fell on this mountain in the last battle for the city of Ravenna. They
fell in the same hour; to-day is the day. They rushed with joyous
shouts against the enemies' spears--for their people."

He ceased. The men looked down with emotion. At last the old man drew
himself up and glanced at the sky.

"It is enough," said he, "the stars are paling. Midnight is long since
past. You three return into the city. Thou, Teja, wilt surely remain
with me; to thee, more than to any other, is given the gift of sorrow,
as of song; and keep with me the guard of honour beside the dead."

Teja nodded, and sat down without a word at the foot of the grave, just
where he was standing. The old man gave Totila the torch, and leaned
opposite Teja against the stone slab. The other three signed to him
with a parting gesture. Gravely, and buried in deep thought, they
descended to the city.



                              CHAPTER III.

A few weeks after this midnight meeting near Ravenna an assembly took
place in Rome; just as secret, also under protection of night, but held
by very different persons for very different aims.

It took place on the Appian Way, near the C[oe]meterium of St.
Calixtus, in a half-ruined passage of the Catacombs; those mysterious
underground ways, which almost make a second city under the streets and
squares of Rome.

These secret vaults--originally old burial-places, often the refuge of
young Christian communities--are so intricate, and their crossings,
terminations, exits, and entrances so difficult to thread, that they
can only be entered under the guidance of some one intimately
acquainted with their inner recesses.

But the men, whose secret intercourse we are about to watch, feared no
danger. They were well led. For it was Silverius, the Catholic
archdeacon of the old church of St. Sebastian, who had led his friends
direct from the crypt of his basilica down a steep staircase into this
branch of the vaults; and the Roman priests had the reputation of
having studied the windings of these labyrinths since the days of the
first confessor.

The persons assembled also seemed not to have met there for the first
time; the gloom of the place made little impression upon them.
Indifferently they leaned against the walls of the dismal semi-circular
room, which, scantily lighted by a hanging lamp of bronze, formed the
termination of the low passage. Indifferently they heard the drops of
damp fall from the roof to the floor, or, when their feet now and then
struck against white and mouldering bones, they calmly pushed them to
one side.

Besides Silverius, there were present a few other orthodox priests, and
a number of aristocratic Romans, nobles of the Western Empire, who had
remained for centuries in almost hereditary possession of the higher
dignities of the state and city.

Silently and attentively they observed the movements of the archdeacon;
who, after having mustered those present, and thrown several searching
glances into the neighbouring passages--where might be seen, keeping
watch in the gloom, some youths in clerical costume--now evidently
prepared to open the assembly in form.

Yet once again he went up to a tall man who leaned motionless against
the wall opposite to him, and with whom he had repeatedly exchanged
glances; and when this man had replied to a questioning gesture by a
silent nod, he turned to the others and spoke.

"Beloved in the name of the triune God! Once again are we assembled
here to do a holy work. The sword of Edom is brandished over our heads,
and King Pharaoh pants for the blood of the children of Israel. We,
however, do not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the
soul, we fear much more those who may destroy both body and soul in
hell-fire. We trust, during the terrors of night, to His help who led
His people through the wilderness, in the day by a cloud of smoke, at
night by a pillar of fire. And to this we will hold fast: that what we
suffer, we suffer for God's sake; what we do, we do to the honour of
His name. Thanks to Him, for He has blest our zeal. Small as those of
the Gospel were our beginnings, but we are already grown like a tree by
the fresh water-springs. With fear and trembling we first assembled
here; great was our danger, weak our hope; noble blood of the best has
been shed; to-day, if we remain firm in faith, we may boldly say that
the throne of King Pharaoh is supported on reeds, and that the days of
the heathen are counted in the land."

"To business!" interrupted a young man with short curly black hair and
brilliant black eyes. Impatiently he threw his _sagum_ (or short cloak)
back over his right shoulder, so that his broad sword became visible.
"To business, priest! What shall be done to-night?"

Silverius cast a look at the youth, which, with all its unctuous
repose, could not quite conceal his lively dissatisfaction at such bold
independence. In a sharp tone of voice he continued:

"Those who do not believe in the holiness of our aim, should not, were
it only for the sake of their own worldly aims, try to disturb the
belief of others in its sanctity. But to-night, my Licinius, my hasty
young friend, a new and highly welcome member is to be added to our
league; his accession is a visible sign of the grace of God."

"Who will you introduce? Are the conditions fulfilled? Do you answer
for him unconditionally, or have you other surety?" So asked another of
those present, a man of ripe years with regular features, who, a staff
between his feet, sat quietly on a projection of the wall.

"I answer for him, my Scævola; besides, his person? is sufficient----"

"Nothing of the sort. The statutes of our league demand surety, and I
insist upon it," said Scævola quietly.

"Good, good; I will be surety, toughest of all jurists!" repeated the
priest with a smile.

He made a sign towards one of the passages to the left.

From thence appeared two young _ostiarii_ (doorkeepers), leading a man
into the middle of the vault, upon whose covered head all eyes were
fixed. After a pause, Silverius lifted the cover from the head and
shoulders of the new comer.

"Albinus!" cried the others, in surprise, indignation, and anger.

Young Licinius grasped his sword; Scævola slowly rose; confused
exclamations sounded from all sides.

"What! Albinus, the traitor?"

The reviled man looked shyly about him; his relaxed features announced
inborn cowardice; as if beseeching help he turned his eyes towards the
priest.

"Yes, Albinus!" said the latter quietly, thus appealed to. "Will any
one of the colleagues speak against him? Let him speak."

"By my Genius!" cried Licinius, before any one could reply, "needs it
to be told? We all know who and what Albinus is. A cowardly shameful
traitor"--anger suffocated his voice.

"Invectives are no proof," interposed Scævola. "But I ask himself; he
shall confess here before us all. Albinus, was it you, or was it not,
who, when the existence of our league was betrayed to the tyrant and
you alone were accused, looked quietly on and saw the noble Boëthius
and Symmachus, our confederates, because they defended you against the
tyrant, despoiled of their fortune, persecuted, taken prisoners and
executed; while you, the really accused, saved yourself by taking a
shameful oath that you would never more trouble yourself about the
state, and by suddenly disappearing? Speak, was it you for whose sake
the pride of our fatherland fell?"

A murmur of indignation went through the assembly. The accused remained
dumb and trembled; even Silverius lost countenance for a moment.

Then the man who was leaning against the wall opposite, raised himself
and took a step forward; his mere vicinity seemed to embolden the
priest, who again began:

"Friends, what you say has happened, but not as you say it. Before all
things, know this: Albinus is the _least_ to blame. What he did, he did
by my advice."

"By your advice!"

"You dare to confess it?"

"Albinus was accused through the treachery of a slave, who had
deciphered the secret writing in the letters to Byzantium. All the
tyrant's suspicion was aroused; every appearance of resistance or of
connection would increase the danger. The impetuosity of Boëthius and
Symmachus, who courageously defended Albinus, was noble but foolish,
for it revealed to the barbarians the sentiments of the whole of the
Roman aristocracy; and showed that Albinus did not stand alone. They
acted against my advice, and alas! have suffered death for so doing.
But their zeal was superfluous; for the hand of the Lord suddenly
bereft the slave of life before further revelations, and the secret
writings of Albinus had been successfully destroyed before his arrest.

"But do you believe that Albinus would have been silent under torture,
under the threat of death, if naming his co-conspirators could have
saved him? You do not believe it, Albinus himself did not believe it.
Therefore it was necessary, before all else, to gain time and to
prevent the use of torture. This was accomplished by his oath.
Meanwhile, it is true, Boëthius and Symmachus suffered; they could not
be saved; but of their silence, even under torture, we were sure.

"Albinus was freed from his prison by a miracle, like St. Paul at
Philippi. It was said that he had escaped to Athens, and the tyrant was
contented with prohibiting his return. But the triune God has prepared
a refuge for him here in His temple until the hour of freedom
approaches. In the solitude of His sacred asylum the Lord has touched
his heart in a wonderful manner, and, undismayed by the danger of
death, which once before had so nearly overtaken him, he again enters
into our circle, and offers to the service of God and the fatherland
his whole immense fortune. Listen: he has made over all his property to
the church of St. Maria Majoris for the uses of our league. Would you
despise him and his millions?"

A pause of astonishment ensued; at last Licinius cried:

"Priest, you are as wise as----as a priest. But such wisdom pleases me
not."

"Silverius," said the jurist, "you may take the millions. It is fitting
that you should do so. But I was the friend of Boëthius; it is not
fitting that I should have anything in common with that coward. I
cannot forgive him. Away with him!"

"Away with him!" sounded from all sides. Scævola had given utterance to
the sentiment of all present. Albinus grew pale; even Silverius quailed
under this general indignation. "Cethegus!" whispered he, claiming
assistance.

This man, who, until now, had remained silent and had only regarded the
speakers with cool superiority, now stepped into the middle of the
assembly.

He was tall and lean, but powerful, with a broad breast and muscles of
pure steel.

A purple hem on his toga and delicate sandals betrayed riches, rank and
taste, but a long brown soldier's mantle hid the remainder of his
underclothing. His head was one of those which, once seen, are never
again forgotten. His thick and still glossy black hair was cut short,
after Roman fashion, round his lofty, almost too prominent forehead and
nobly-formed temples. Deep under his finely-arched brows were hidden
his narrow eyes, in whose undecided dark-grey colour lay a whole ocean
of sunken passions and a still more pronounced expression of the
coolest self-control. Round his sharply cut and beardless lips lurked a
trait of proud contempt of God and His whole creation.

As he stepped forward, and, with quiet distinction, allowed his eyes to
wander over the excited assembly; as he commenced his insinuating yet
commanding speech, every one felt his superiority, and few could remain
in his presence without a consciousness of subordination.

"Why do you wrangle," he said coldly, "about things that must be done?
Who wills the end, must will the means. You will not forgive? As you
please! That is of little consequence. But you must and you can forget.
I also was a friend of the dead, perhaps their dearest. And yet--I
will forget. I do so just because I was their friend. _He_ loves
them, Scævola, and he alone, who avenges them. For the sake of
revenge---- Albinus, your hand!"

All were silent, awed more by the personality than convinced by the
reasons of the speaker.

But the jurist still objected:

"Rusticiana, the influential woman, the widow of Boëthius, the daughter
of Symmachus, is favourable to our league. Will she remain so if this
man enters it? Can she ever forget and forgive? Never!"

"She can. Do not believe me, believe your eyes."

With these words Cethegus quickly turned and entered one of the
side-passages, whose opening had been hidden until now by his own
person.

Close to the entrance a veiled figure stood listening; he caught her
hand:

"Come," whispered he, "come now."

"I cannot! I will not!" was the almost inaudible answer of the
resisting woman. "I curse him! I cannot look at him, the wretch!"

"It must be. Come; you can and you shall--for I will have it so." He
threw back her veil; one look, and she followed as if deprived of the
power of will.

They turned the corner of the entrance:

"Rusticiana!" cried the whole assembly.

"A woman in our meeting!" exclaimed the jurist. "It is against the
statutes, the laws."

"Yes, Scævola; but the laws are made for the league, not the league for
the laws. And you would never have believed from _me_, that which you
now see with your own eyes."

He laid the widow's hand within the trembling right hand of Albinus.

"Look! Rusticiana forgives! Who will now resist?"

Vanquished and overruled, all remained silent. For Cethegus all further
proceedings seemed to have lost interest. He retired into the
background with Rusticiana. But the priest now said:

"Albinus is a member of the league."

"And the oath that he swore to the tyrant?" hesitatingly asked Scævola.

"Was forced, and he is absolved from it by Holy Church. But now it is
time to depart. Let us only conclude the most pressing business. Here,
Licinius, is the plan of the fortress of Neapolis: you must have it
copied by to-morrow; it goes to Belisarius. Here, Scævola, letters from
Byzantium, from Theodora, the pious wife of Justinian: you must answer
them. Here, Calpurnius, is an assignment of half a million _solidi_
from Albinus: you will send them to the Frankish major domus; he has
great influence with his king. Here, Pomponius, is a list of the
patriots in Dalmatia; you know men and things there, take notice if
important names are omitted. And be it known to all of you, that,
according to news received to-day from Ravenna, the hand of the Lord
lies heavy on the tyrant. Deep melancholy, too tardy remorse for all
his sins, oppresses him, and the consolations of the true faith have
not yet penetrated into his soul. Have patience but a little while; the
angry voice of the Judge will soon summon him; then comes the day of
freedom. At the next Ides, at the same hour, we shall meet here again.
The blessing of the Lord be with you!"

A motion of his hand dismissed the assembly; the young priests came out
of the side-passage with torches, and led the members, each one singly,
in different directions, to the secret exits of the Catacombs.



                              CHAPTER IV.

Silverius, Cethegus, and Rusticiana went together up the steps which
led to the crypt of the basilica of St. Sebastian. From thence they
passed through the church into the adjoining house of the archdeacon.
On arriving there, Silverius convinced himself that all the inhabitants
of the house were asleep, with the exception of an old slave, who was
watching in the atrium near a half-extinguished lamp. At a sign from
his master he lighted a silver lamp which stood near him, and pressed a
secret spring in the marble wainscot of the room.

A slab of marble turned on its hinges and allowed the priest who had
taken up the lamp to pass, with his two companions, into a small, low
chamber, and then quickly and noiselessly closed behind them, leaving
no trace of an opening.

The small chamber, now simply adorned by a tall wooden crucifix, a
fall-stool, and a few plain Christian symbols on a golden background,
had evidently, as the cushioned shelf which ran round the walls showed,
served for those small banquets of one or two guests, whose
unrestrained comfort Horace has so often celebrated in song. At the
time of which I speak it was the private chamber in which the
archdeacon brooded over his most secret priestly or worldly plans.

Cethegus silently seated himself on the _lectus_ (a small couch),
throwing the superficial glance of a critic at a Mosaic picture
inserted into the opposite wall. While the priest was occupied in
pouring wine from an amphora with large curving handles into some cups
which stood ready, and placing a metal dish of fruit on the bronze
tripod table, Rusticiana stood opposite Cethegus, measuring him with an
expression of astonishment and indignation.

Scarcely forty years of age, this woman showed traces of a rare--and
rather manly--beauty, which had suffered less from time than from
violent passions. Here and there her raven-black braids were streaked
with white, not grey, and strong lines lay round the mobile corners of
her mouth.

She leaned her left hand on the table, and meditatively stroked her
brow with her right, while she gazed at Cethegus. At last she spoke.

"Tell me, tell me, Cethegus, what power is this that you have over me?
I no more love you. I ought to hate you. I do hate you. And yet I must
involuntarily obey you, like a bird under the fascinating eye of a
snake. And you place my hand, _this_ hand, in that of that miserable
man! Say, you evil-doer, what is this power?"

Cethegus was inattentively silent. At last, leaning back, he said:
"Habit, Rusticiana, habit."

"Truly, 'tis habit! The habit of a slavery that has existed ever since
I can remember. It was natural that as a girl I should admire the
handsome son of our neighbours; that I believed in your love was
excusable, did you not kiss me? And who could--at that time--know that
you were incapable of loving anything--even yourself? That the wife of
Boëthius did not smother the mad passion which, as if in sport, you
again fanned into a flame, was a sin; but God and the Church have
forgiven it. But that I should still, after knowing for years your
utter heartlessness, when the glow of passion is extinguished in my
veins, that I should still most blindly follow your demoniac will--that
is folly enough to make me laugh aloud."

And she laughed wildly, and pressed her right hand to her brow.

The priest stopped in his domestic occupations and looked stealthily at
Cethegus. He was intensely interested.

Cethegus leaned his head back against the marble moulding, and with his
right hand grasped the drinking-cup which stood before him.

"You are unjust, Rusticiana," he said quietly, "and confused. You mix
the sports of Eros with the works of Eris and the Fates. You know that
I was the friend of Boëthius, although I kissed his wife. Perhaps just
for that reason. I see nothing particular in that. And you--well,
Silverius and the saints have forgiven you. You know further, that I
hate these Goths, mortally hate them; that I have the will and--more
than all others--the power to carry through that which is now your
greatest wish, to revenge your father, whom you loved, and your
husband, whom you honoured, on these barbarians.

"Therefore you obey my instigations, and you are wise in so doing; for
you have a decided talent for intrigue, but your impetuosity often
clouds your judgment. It spoils your finest plans. Therefore it is well
that you follow cooler guidance. That is all. But now go. Your slave is
crouching, drunk with sleep, in the vestibule. She believes that you
are in the confessional with friend Silverius. The confession must not
last too long. And we also have business to transact. Greet Camilla,
your lovely child, for me, and farewell."

He rose, took her hand, and led her gently to the door. She followed
reluctantly, nodded to the priest at parting, looked once more at
Cethegus, who appeared not to observe her inward emotion, and went out,
slightly shaking her head.

Cethegus sat down again and emptied his cup of wine.

"A strange struggle in this woman's nature," remarked Silverius, and
sat down by Cethegus with stylus, wax-tablets, letters and documents.

"It is not strange. She wishes to atone for having wronged her husband
by avenging him," said Cethegus. "And that she can accomplish this by
means of her former lover, makes the sacred duty doubly sweet. To be
sure, she is not conscious of it.--But what have we to do?"

The two men now began their business: to consider such points of the
conspiracy as they did not judge advisable to communicate to all the
members of the league.

"At present," began the archdeacon, "it is above all things necessary
to ascertain the amount of this fortune of Albinus, and decide upon its
appropriation. We assuredly require money, much money."

"Money affairs are your province,"--said Cethegus, drinking. "I
understand them, of course, but they annoy me."

"Further," continued Silverius, "the most influential men in Sicilia,
Neapolis, and Apulia must be won over to our cause. Here is the list of
their names, with notes annexed. There are men amongst them who are not
to be allured by the usual means."

"Give it to me," said Cethegus, "I will manage that," And he cut up a
Persian apple.

After an hour's hard work, the most pressing business was settled, and
the host replaced the documents, in a secret drawer in the wall behind
the crucifix.

The priest was tired, and looked with envy at his companion, whose
powerful frame and indefatigable spirit no late hours or exertion
seemed able to exhaust.

He expressed something of the sort, as Cethegus again filled the silver
cup.

"Practice, friend, strong nerves, and," added Cethegus, smiling, "a
good conscience; that is the whole secret."

"Yes, but in earnest, Cethegus, you are a riddle to me in other
respects."

"I should hope so."

"Oh ho! do you consider yourself such a superior being that I cannot
fathom you?"

"Not at all. But still sufficiently deep to be to others no less a
riddle than--to myself. Your pride in your knowledge of mankind may be
at ease. I am no wiser about myself than you are. Only fools are
transparent."

"In fact," said the priest, expatiating on the subject, "the key to
your nature must be difficult to find. For example, look at the members
of our league. It is easy to say what motives have led them to join us.
The hot young courage of a Licinius; the pig-headed but honest sense of
justice of a Scævola; as for myself and the other priests--our zeal for
the honour of God."

"Naturally," said Cethegus, drinking.

"Others are induced by ambition, or are in hopes that they may cut off
the heads of their creditors in a civil war; or they are tired of the
orderly condition of this country under the Goths, or have been
offended by one of these foreigners. Most of them have a natural
repugnance to the barbarians, and are in the habit of seeing in the
Emperor alone the master of Italy. But none of these reasons apply to
you, and----"

"And," interrupted Cethegus, "that is very uncomfortable, is it not?
For by knowledge of their motives one can govern men. Well, I am sorry,
reverend friend, but I cannot help you. I really do not know myself
what my motive is. I am so curious about it, that I would gladly tell
it to you--and allow myself to be governed--if I could only find it
out. Only one thing I feel--that these Goths are my antipathy. I hate
these full-blooded fellows, with their broad flaxen beards. I cannot
bear their brutal good humour, their ingenuous youthfulness, their
stupid heroism, their unbroken natures. It is the impudence of chance,
which governs the world, that this country, after such a history,
possessing men like--like you and me--should be ruled by these Northern
bears!"

He tossed his head indignantly, closed his eyes, and sipped a small
quantity of wine.

"That the barbarians must go, we are agreed," said Silverius, "and with
this, all is gained as far as I am concerned. For I only await the
deliverance of the Church from these heretical barbarians, who deny the
divinity of Christ, and make Him a demi-god. I hope that the primacy of
all Christendom will, as is fitting, incontestably fall to the share of
the Roman Church. But as long as Rome is in the power of the heretics,
while the Bishop of Byzantium is supported by the only orthodox and
legitimate Emperor----"

"The Bishop of Rome cannot be the first Bishop of Christendom, nor the
master of Italy; and therefore the Roman Apostolic See, even when
occupied by a Silverius, cannot be what it ought to be--the highest.
And yet that is what Silverius wishes."

The priest looked up in surprise.

"Do not be uneasy, reverend friend. I knew this long ago, and have kept
your secret, although you did not confide it to me. But further----" He
again filled his cup. "Your Falernian has been well stored, but it is
too sweet.--Properly speaking, you can but wish that these Goths may
evacuate the throne of the Cæsars, and not that the Byzantines should
take their place; for in that case the Bishop of Rome would have again
a superior bishop and an emperor in Byzantium. You must therefore,
instead of the Goths, wish--not for an Emperor--Justinian--but--what
else?"

"Either," eagerly interrupted Silverius, "a special Emperor of the
Western Empire----"

"Who, however," said Cethegus, completing the sentence, "would be only
a puppet in the hands of the holy Petrus----"

"Or a Roman republic, a State of the Church----"

"In which the Bishop of Rome is master, Italy the principal country,
and the barbarian kings in Gaul, Germany, and Spain the obedient sons
of the Church. All very fine, my friend. But first the enemy must be
annihilated, whose spoils you already divide. Therefore let us drink an
old Roman toast: 'Woe to the barbarians!'"

He rose and drank to the priest.

"But," he added, "the last night-watch creeps on, and my slaves must
find me in the morning in my bedchamber. Farewell!"

With this he drew the _cucullus_ (hood) of his mantle over his head and
departed.

His host looked after him. "A very important tool!" he said to himself.
"It is a good thing that he is only a tool. May he always remain so!"

Cethegus walked away from the Via Appia in a north-westerly direction,
towards the Capitol, beneath which, at the northern end of the Via
Sacra, his house was situated, to the north-east of the Forum Romanum.

The cool morning air played refreshingly over his brow. He threw open
his mantle and deeply inflated his strong broad chest.

"Yes, I am a riddle," he said to himself. "I join in a conspiracy and
go about by night, like a republican or a lover at twenty. And
wherefore? Who knows why he breathes? Because he must. And so I do what
I must. But one thing is certain, this priest may--perhaps must--become
Pope; but he must not remain so long, else farewell my scarcely-avowed
thoughts, which are yet but dreams and cloud-mists. Perhaps it may be
that from them will arise a storm that will decide my fate. See, it
lightens in the east! 'Tis well; I accept the omen!"

With these words he entered his house.

In his bed-chamber he found a letter on the cedar table before his bed,
tied with a silken string, and sealed with the royal seal. He cut the
string with his dagger, opened the double waxen tablets, and read:

"To Cethegus Cæsarius, the Princeps Senatus, Marcus Aurelius
Cassiodorus, Senator.

"Our lord and king lies on his death-bed. His daughter and heiress,
Amalaswintha, wishes to speak with you before his end.

"You are to undertake the most important office in the kingdom.

"Hasten at once to Ravenna."



                               CHAPTER V.

Over the King's palace at Ravenna, with all its gloomy splendour and
inhospitable spaciousness, lay an air of breathless anxiety.

The old castle of the Cæsars had suffered many disfiguring changes in
the course of centuries, and since the Gothic kings, with all their
Germanic courtiers, had taken the place of the emperors, it had
assumed a very inharmonious aspect, for many chambers, intended
for the peculiar customs of Roman life, stood, still retaining
the old magnificence of their arrangements, unused and neglected.
Cobwebs covered the mosaic of the rich baths of Honorius, and in the
toilet-chamber of Placidia the lizards climbed over the marble frames
of the silver mirrors on the walls. On the one side, the necessities of
a more warlike court had obliged the removal of many walls, in order to
change the small rooms of the ancient building into wider halls for
arsenals, banqueting and guard-rooms, and, on the other, neighbouring
houses had been joined to the palace by new walls, so as to create a
stronghold in the middle of the city.

In the dried-up _piscina maxima_ (large fish-pond) fair-haired boys now
romped, and in the marble halls of the _palæstra_[1] neighed the horses
of the Gothic guards. So the extensive edifice had the dismal
appearance partly of a scarcely-preserved ruin, and partly of a
half-finished new erection; and thus the palace of the present ruler
seemed a symbol of his Roman-Gothic kingdom, and of his whole
half-finished, half-decayed political creation.

On the day, however, on which Cethegus, after years of absence, once
again entered the house, there lay heavy upon it a cloud of anxiety,
sorrow and gloom, for its royal soul was departing from it.

The great man, who here had guided, for the space of a man's life, the
fate of Europe; who was wondered at, with love or with hate, by West
and by East; the hero of his age; the powerful Theodoric of Verona, of
whose name--even during his lifetime--Legend had possessed herself; the
great Amelung, King Theodoric, was about to die.

So said the physicians--if not to himself, yet to his nearest
relations--and the report soon spread in the great and populous city.

Although such an end to the secret sufferings of the aged King had been
long held possible, the news that the blow was at hand now filled all
hearts with the greatest excitement.

The faithful Goths were anxious and grieved, and a dull fear was the
predominating feeling even of the Roman population, for here in
Ravenna, in the immediate vicinity of the King, the Italians had had
frequent opportunities of admiring his mildness and generosity, and of
experiencing his beneficence.

And besides, it was feared that after the death of this King, who,
during his lifetime--with the single exception of the last contest with
the Emperor and the Senate, when Boëthius and Symmachus bled--had
protected the Italians from the harshness and violence of his people--a
new rule of severity and oppression would commence on the part of the
Goths.

And, finally, another and more noble influence was at work; the
personality of this hero-King had been so grand, so majestic, that even
those who had often wished for the destruction of himself and his
kingdom, could not--at the moment when this luminary was about to be
extinguished--revel in a feeling of malicious joy, and were unable to
overcome a deep depression.